DAYDREAM

Can you use the maximum modulus principle to define holomorphic function?

We can use a compact topological group like a circle to show how symmetry is related to groups. Why must lines be straight through center for a group law?

Charts?

Why classification of compact, connected and simply connected Lie group is so simple?

Embedding? General examples?

Notes on field of fractions of half line functions to give distribution theory?

How are analytic functions related to the completions of a commutative ring?

How do holomorphic function in complex analysis related to regular functions in algebraic geometry?

Eisenstein criterion?

Why does one define the product topology with all but finitely many opens in components space are equal to the component space? 

Moduli spaces, spaces corresponding to object? Represent a contravariant functor of interest. This usually means that they represent a contravariant functor that we're interested in. For example, Vakil constructs the Grassmannian as a scheme that represents the contravariant functor that takes a scheme $X$ to the set of  surjective morphisms $O_X^n \rightarrow E$, where $E$ is locally free of rank $k$. Make this make sense?

Give an example where an inverse images of a sheaf is not a sheaf.

Compact topological group?

V-isotypic component?

Banach space representation

Tensor contraction?

Implicit function theorem?  Versus inverse function theorem?

Cauchy integral formula?

Galois field in algebraic codes?

Maximum modulus principle?

Von Neumann algebra vs C* algebra?

Make the definition of a class using logical predicates make sense (or distinguish it from a set somehow).

Semisimple Lie groups and Lie algebras? 

Christoffel symbols?

What are covariant derivatives? What is parallel transport in this context?

Why is separatedness the condition such that intersection of affines is an affine?

Lp space duality?

How to understand Lie’s three laws? It is apparently some realisation from some functor but it is not really clear?

How does one prove that the continuum hypothesis is independent are ZFC.

What is Clariaut's theorem and why is it true?

What is the conjugation operation for ideals? Is it multiplication on the left giving 0.

What is the difference between geometric fibres and geometrically connected?

What is an ample line bundle?

What are the equivalences of dense and how should I prove them?

What are Hopf surfaces? Complex analytic K3 surface? Complex algebraic K3 surfaces? Why should I care about them?

Why ar proper curves projective? https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/2629341/proper-curves-over-some-field-are-

What does it mean for descent to be the inverse of stable under base change?

What is the difference between closed immersion and embeddings?

Make sense of the exponent axes and what these represent: https://terrytao.wordpress.com/2010/03/11/a-type-diagram-for-function-spaces/
https://mathoverflow.net/questions/17736/way-to-memorize-relations-between-the-sobolev-spaces/17906#17906

Why is the identity map bounded but non compact unless finite dimension vector spaces? A bounded linear operator on separable Hilbert space is noncompact, hint uncountably many eigenvalues, so non separable. And on compactness: think of it as a MUCH stronger property than boundedness.

Don’t fully understand how tensor and Hom are adjunctions? Constant is left adjoint to limits which are right adjoint. Colimit is left adjoint to constant which are right adjoint

What is Tychnoff? Urysohns lemma? Tietze extension theorem?

How does one do Joukowdsky transforms rigorously?

What is the implicit function theorem in differential geometry?

What is the motivation for Jaffard domains, and Prufer domains?

Do not understand the definition of Prufer domains: Prufer domain: commutative ring without zero divisors, such that every non zero finitely generated ideal is invertible.

Weak star topology?

Fourier-Mukai transform?

What does it mean for the Fourier transform to turn multiples of powers of x into derivatives? Is it a functor? How is this related to the distribution theory?

What are orbits in group theory? 

What is the orbit stabiliser theorem?

What are covering sieves? What are Grothendieck constructions? How did Scholze define the plus construction?

What is the homotopy excision theorem and how does it prove the Freudenthal suspension theorem?

What are modalities and why is it important?

Why is the mapping class group finitely generated by Dehn twists?

Definition of mapping class group not motivated. Classification even more so. Thurston-Nielsen classification.

https://mathoverflow.net/questions/257885/roadmap-to-hill-hopkins-ravenel/257908#257908

https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_statements_independent_of_ZFC
Understand how these statements fail.

Don’t understand Zhen Lin’s comment: usual five lemma follows from the short five lemma: factor each morphism appearing in the rows into an epimorphism followed by a monomorphism.

Don’t understand the salamander lemma, it’s proof and its importance.

Don’t fully understand Borcherds complete computation of Tor over finitely generated abelian groups.

Why are finitely generated abelian groups a direct sum of the cyclic groups? What is the definition of finitely generated abelian groups?

What is the left adjoint of the random variable functor? It seems to forget some set of real numbers and converts it into outcomes? 

What are the key properties of Tor and Ext and how do you remember them?

Why in the last step in the construction of Tor or Ext do you take homology?

What are lifts and where does the duality of projective resolutions and injective resolutions come from?

Why are taking resolutions the key step before defining a functor so that you can get long exact sequences?

Why can’t constructs in commutative algebra like rings, ideals (functor from group conjugation), be directly expressed in terms of functors? https://math.uchicago.edu/~amathew/chthreeimportantfunctors.pdf

Don’t understand measurable functors and the fact that the realisation of a probability law is a natural transformation from the random variable functor to the measurable functors? Where in the construction do you want the measurable functor to use the axiom of dependent choice?

What is a list of diagram lemmas?

What are inductive systems and why should I care about formal filtered colimits? Ncat says that large categories are equivalent to inductive categories and are hence accessible in some sense of the word?

I don’t really fully understand the effectiveness of diagrams.

How is Gelfand duality related to the Stone Weierstrass theorem and how is Peter Johnstones book talking about this? See ncat page on Stone spaces.

What is the McKay correspondence between Dublin diagrams, platonic splits, finite subgroups of the special orthogonal group in three dimensions, finite subgroups of the special unitary group, and the simple Lie group. Why should I care about the McKay correspedoence?

Are there group extensions of subgroups to proper groups? Is there a word for this? This is similar to field extensions?

Also how does one explain that using a proper Klelisi or Eilenberg-Moore category gives Markov chains? What are the differences?

What are spin groups and how are they related to physics?

What are a list of special functors in homological algebra, Ext, Tor, Ind???

https://youtu.be/PHm4bYziyug?feature=shared
I don’t understand Scholze definition of cohomology and why is it easier to use? https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/54752/sheaf-cohomology-what-is-it-and-where-can-i-learn-it
Akhil Mathew gives an immediate explanation of this. https://mathoverflow.net/questions/38966/what-is-sheaf-cohomology-intuitively

Why is defining the opposite category of opens an open problem? It is not really Stone spaces or spatial frames.

I understand why do we care about derived functors (enough injectives), but how to we understand it? Scholze uses it to give a very clean definition of etale cohomology and what does this even mean? Example: cohomology is the right defined functor from the “abelian space” (specifically spectra) and getting an abelian group. Note that abelian groups are a fully faithful inclusion into cohomology. What does it mean by enough injectives? Sheaf cohomology is the right derived functor to the global section functor?
Answer; this is Grothendieck’s genius to use a functor for any coefficient. More specifically any functor as coefficients. 

How are anima a generalisation of homotopy types?

What are projective objects and projective resolutions?

How are resolutions both an exact sequence of modules and objects in an abelian category?

What does it mean for something to be accessible?

What is left exact localisations and why should we care about them?

How does one make it easy to define frames particularly the distribution of joints and meets apart from using infimum and supremum?

Profinite space: inverse limit of finite space gives subspace topology of the product? What is the subspace topology and what does this mean?

I do not understand the inverse limit completion of the ring of integers modulo prime powers.

What is the functor that works on opens that is the colimit of open overs on a product open covers over equalisers / descent such that applying this functor on a presheaf gives a separated sheaf, applying this functor again gives sheafification? Also how do we use separated morphisms in the definition.

What are sifted colimits?

Make sense of essentially algebraic as set^C with C lex, coherent topoi as first order, geometric as topoi. 

What is a classifying topos?

What does it mean for a first order languages? Sort, terms, and formulas?

Locales are the right adjoints of topological spaces by the functor or the opposite category of frames? Is this correct?

What is weakly Kan injective?

https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/Gelfand+duality Gelfand duality, why do we care about Gelfand duality when others exist? What are some motivating examples of Gelfand duality? It just seems like a broad categorisation example topology to commutative algebra and algebraic geometry to commutative rings. What is the difference between this and Isbell duality which is also about algebra and geometry? Isbell seems to be about sheafification and form of spectra, whereas Gelfand is more direct and about algebraic structures and some topology/geometry?

I don’t understand how a copresheaf expresses quantity where a presheaf expresses space by probing. What Ncat did was to express it as some internal hom between sets of quantities and values then gets the copresheaf as some covariant functor from copresheaves to set. The contravariant functor is the spectrum operations, from presheaves to set, the covariant functor is the copresheafification (whatever that is)
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/space+and+quantity

I don’t understand why how symmetric monoidal tensor products as left adjoints of internal hom and internal Hom as right adjoints for symmetric monoidal tensor products must be the correct valid notion.

What is the motivation behind a diagonal morphism, and why should we care about separated morphisms so much it warrants its own functor adjunction?

https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/space+and+quantity
How does one understand Isbell duality between space and quantity in terms of topoi?

https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/Tannaka+duality how can one use the proof of Tannaka duality that groups are represented by automorphisms.

https://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2009/03/firstorder_logical_duality.html
How can use ultracategories and ultrafunctors as geometric objects in our head to express the duality between syntax and semantics of first order logic?

What is the syntax and semantics of first order logic? And how does Makkai duality clarify this?

What are centralisers of group elements?

How are vector bundles equivalent to class groups?

How does one draw the ring of dual numbers?

https://xorshammer.com/2011/07/09/a-logical-interpretation-of-some-bits-of-topology/
Try to understand Lebesgue covering dimension.

Why does checking structured morphisms of schemes require a base change?

Semidecidable logic as some sort algebra does not make sense to me as an analogy to topological space, shouldnt it be one counter example to disprove in finite time? Then looking at many examples to prove in infinite time? Or is this the converse?

Zariski site, you have a thin single ply of tissue with some notion of gluing, inclusion, lattices? Etale site will have multiply ply, collapse Galois actions together to get some Zariski site. What is the relation between Galois actions and sites?

Contravariance of universal property, example: there is a unique map from scheme S to spectrum of Z, scheme S can be represented by this unique map. The proof relies on the fact that there is a unique (ring) homomorphism from the integers to any other ring. This is contravariant! Why is that? Can we complete this proof so that it clarifies what is going on. Note, a ring is an abelian group with an additional monoidal structure given by tensor product?

What problem did introducing the symmetric group with equivariance solve? Is it related to Cayley’s theorem and Yoneda stuff?

Suspension isomorphisms: key ingredient in Mayer Vietoris sequence and long exact sequences? Why?

What are representable functors as upper sets or posets?

What is finite type, finite presentation?

What are some nasty examples when we fail to consider regular or smooth schemes (other than obvious nilpotent stuff)

Why are symmetric spectra pointed? Why define some equivariance with symmetric group?

What is an etale fundamental group?

What is unramified morphism?

Why should I care about the differences between free, projective, flat and torsion free

What does it mean for types to be Kan complexes and dependent types to be a Kan Fibration? Are dependent types some sort of function?

What are the analogies of higher inductive types with homotopy theory?

What is the difference between flat and locally free (locally have some basis?)

What is an infinity projective 1 loop space 

What does it mean for a Cartesian closed category to be closed by exponentiation? Exponentiation is some sort of function from the power to the base right?

Why do we care about presentability and subobject classifiers in topoi?

What is an exponential?

What is a Zariski constant?

What does locally Cartesian closed have to do with dependent types!

What is a De Morgan algebra?

What is a freely distributed lattice?

What is a Postnoikov tower and how is it related to a Whitehead tower?

What is an Eilenberg Maclane spectrum?

What is a smooth scheme?

What is a moving lemma?

What is a frame transfer?

Why should I care about Severi Brauer varieties?

What is a quasi coherent sheaf?

What is an Azumaya algebra?

What is a Morita equivalence?

What is a perfect base field?

What is etale topology, fppf topology? Sites? What is an easy to remember definition of sites other than the fibre product?

What is Morava K theory?

What is presentable and subobject classifier in topos?

How is tensor product related to smash product?

What is exponential?

What is Galois group and why does a symmetric monoidal stable infinity 1 category suitable for this?

Why are Galois extensions normal and separable? Why are these the right ones. 

What is Cartesian closed?

What is an etale fundamental groups?

https://mathoverflow.net/questions/394054/why-stable-infty-categories/394056#394056

http://www.math.uni-bonn.de/people/schwede/SymSpec-v3.pdf

https://mathoverflow.net/questions/301780/entering-to-the-k-theory-realm/301797#301797

Is there a compilation of all varieties drawings from Mumford book that somebody has drawn out with clear explanations?

What is Nisnevich descent, etale descent, ???
You have some sort of topology you want that is not like the typical topology, since they are somewhat disconnected, certain glueing exists. This motivates these forms of descent, topologies…

Is there a simpler definition of symmetric ring spectra that I can fit in my head AND DO COMPUTATIONS WITH? I don’t like the fact I have to vaguely point at some equivariance under symmetric groups, and then define spectra with stable homotopy suspension colimit thing. 

What are function spaces that you can fit in your head?

Don’t understand what are covering sieves, local isomorphisms and separated presheaves?

How on earth do you work snake lemmas, five lemmas, magic diagrams. Do not understand motivation?
https://angyansheng.github.io/notes/homological-algebra-i

Don’t understand how to keep it in head? Kunneth formula. Duality

I realised a lot of classical algebraic topology still appear? Need to go back and learn it. These are for example Kunneth formula, Eilenberg Maclane spaces…

Horizontal categorification, groups, Groupoids, monoids, category??? Why are some so useful? Groupoids become more than one object.

What is a quiver? Definition

Empty set: $(1)$ as ideal or the unit ideal. Useful in showing (quasi)compactness of Zariski topology?

I still don’t understand cohomology other than it is some sort of dual to homology, it is a generalisation of an abelian group, it has some coefficients.

Flatness: Let $f : X \rightarrow S$ be a morphism of schemes, and assume that $S$ is reduced. What is reduced?
(i) If $S$ is a smooth curve then $f$ is called (geometrically) flat if no 
component of $X$ is mapped to a single point in $S$. 
Here by component we mean an irreducible or embedded component, 
i.e. (in the affine picture) the subvarieties of $X$ occurring in the 
primary decomposition of the ring that defines $X$. Why does this make sense?

How do you use Kan extensions to do all of (classical) category theory quickly in your head? I have notes for this.

Function types are the same as internal homs. Internal logic of the category as function type. Make this make sense? https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/internal+logic

What are finite limits, Cartesian closed, and subobject classifiers?

I read somewhere that there is perfectoid spaces are a third group of all but I cannot remember?

Principal ideal domain corresponds to the spectrum looking like an affine line. How is this related to Z as PID from classification of surfaces?

Localisation of quotients and taking of quotients of localisations are equivalent, and they both give a residue field. What is the geometric interpretation of this?

Hilbert's Weak Nullstellensatz shows that the “traditional points” 
are present as points of the scheme, and this carries over to any algebraically closed field. 
If the field is not algebraically closed, the traditional points are glued together into clumps by Galois conjugation, as in real affine line and the affine line over $F_p$. How does this even work?

Why is it not possible for judgemental equalities to be proven?

How to understand pullbacks and monomorphisms intuitively in the subobject classifier definition?

What is the Freudenthal suspension theorem and how is it used to define spectra?

What does it mean for loop space and suspensions to be adjoints (suspension left adjoint, loop space right adjoint)?

How do I compute homologies my head with practice exercises?


What are adjunctions in homotopy type theory?
https://arxiv.org/pdf/2008.12433

I don’t understand transport?

What Is the relationship between happly, fun ext, and transport?
 
What are modalities? Why should I care about modalities.

What is the motivation of axiom K?

How are truncations the Postnikov sections, and why are these important? How can Postnikov sections with (-1)-type implies propositions?

Don’t understand definition 6.10.4, why define predicate as equivalence class that way.

Why can pushouts be used to construct suspension, join, cones, wedges? These can be done in classical homotopy theory?

I don’t understand the visualisation and contrast between the topological and the type-theoretic induction principles.

What is functional extensionality?

I don’t understand the definition of N-homomorphism between N-algebras.

Don’t understand the definition of quasiinverse?

What is the relationship between sets and Poincare duality in the definition of the 1 -type?

I do not understand total space and the space of sections in the context of homotopy type theory. I always find it hard to imagine the space of functions. Is cobordism?

How to understand dependent product projections?

How are types of sheaves intuitionistic in nature?

What are binding constructs?
What are object classifiers?

What is beta reduction? What is eta expansion as a judgmental equal principle?

How are types obedient to partial equivalence relations?

What are the principles of omniscience?

What is Quillen’s small object argument?

What are (-1)-types and (-1)-truncated logic?
They are the correct way to generalise mere propositions, if we use propositions as types the law of the excluded middle fails see https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/mere+proposition

What are universe truncations and how are they used to construct cardinals?

What motivates local presentability?

Why care about constructivity?

How do you internalise the logic of dependent products?

What is a binding structure?

What are eliminators and constructors in type theory?

How does one understand QR factorisation?

How does an Householder matrix work? What motivates a Householder matrix.
It is meant to be a transform that does some reflection. See Wikipedia

How does unitary matrices be easier to compute (conjugate transpose) and why does it have better stabilityy properties?

What is the relationship between eigenvalue eigenvector equations and the affine line and projective modules?

How does the classification of finitely generated modules generalise the Jordan normal form?
https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/88687/eigenvalues-for-matrices-over-general-rings

How does one easily prove Carathedory’s theorem?

I don’t understand the two cases in the proof of the Lebesgue-Radon-Nikodym derivative theorem?

Why does one define the product topology with all but finitely many opens in components space are equal to the component space? 

Moduli spaces, spaces corresponding to object? Represent a contravariant functor of interest. This usually means that they represent a contravariant functor that we're interested in. For example, Vakil constructs the Grassmannian as a scheme that represents the contravariant functor that takes a scheme $X$ to the set of  surjective morphisms $O_X^n \rightarrow E$, where $E$ is locally free of rank $k$. Make this make sense?

Give an example where an inverse images of a sheaf is not a sheaf.

Compact topological group?

V-isotypic component?

Banach space representation

Tensor contraction?

Implicit function theorem?  Versus inverse function theorem?

Cauchy integral formula?

Unipotent?

Galois field in algebraic codes?

Maximum modulus principle?

Von Neumann algebra vs C* algebra?

Make the definition of a class using logical predicates make sense (or distinguish it from a set somehow).

What are semi simple Lie groups and Lie algebras? 

What are Christoffel symbols and why do people commit effort to compute them?

What are covariant derivatives? What is parallel transport in this context?

Why is separatedness the condition such that intersection of affines is an affine?

What is Lp space duality?

How to understand Lie’s three laws? It is apparently some realisation from some functor but it is not really clear?

How does one prove that the continuum hypothesis is independent are ZFC.

What is Clariauts theorem and why is it true?

What is the conjugation operation for ideals? Is it multiplication on the left giving 0.

What is the difference between geometric fibres and geometrically connected?

What is an ample line bundle?

What are the equivalences of dense and how should I prove them?

What are Hopf surfaces? Complex analytic K3 surface? Complex algebraic K3 surfaces? Why should I care about them?

Why ar proper curves projective? https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/2629341/proper-curves-over-some-field-are-

What does it mean for descent to be the inverse of stable under base change?

What is the difference between closed immersion and embeddings?

Make sense of the exponent axes and what these represent: https://terrytao.wordpress.com/2010/03/11/a-type-diagram-for-function-spaces/
https://mathoverflow.net/questions/17736/way-to-memorize-relations-between-the-sobolev-spaces/17906#17906

Why is the identity map bounded but non compact unless finite dimension vector spaces? A bounded linear operator on separable Hilbert space is noncompact, hint uncountably many eigenvalues, so non separable. And on compactness: think of it as a MUCH stronger property than boundedness.

Don’t fully understand how tensor and Hom are adjunctions? Constant is left adjoint to limits which are right adjoint. Colimit is left adjoint to constant which are right adjoint

What is Tychnoff? Urysohns lemma? Tietze extension theorem?

How does one do Joukowdsky transforms rigorously?

What is the implicit function theorem in differential geometry?

What is the motivation for Jaffard domains, and Prufer domains?

Do not understand the definition of Prufer domains: Prufer domain: commutative ring without zero divisors, such that every non zero finitely generated ideal is invertible.

What is the weak star topology?

What is the Fourier-Mukai transform and why should I care about it?

What does it mean for the Fourier transform to turn multiples of powers of x into derivatives? Is it a functor? How is this related to the distribution theory?

What are orbits in group theory? What is the orbit stabiliser theorem?

What are covering sieves? What are Grothendieck constructions? How did Scholze define the plus construction?

What is the homotopy excision theorem and how does it prove the Freudenthal suspension theorem?

What are modalities and why is it important?

Why is the mapping class group finitely generated by Dehn twists?

Definition of mapping class group not motivated. Classification even more so. Thurston-Nielsen classification.

https://mathoverflow.net/questions/257885/roadmap-to-hill-hopkins-ravenel/257908#257908

https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_statements_independent_of_ZFC
Understand how these statements fail.

Don’t understand Zhen Lin’s comment: usual five lemma follows from the short five lemma: factor each morphism appearing in the rows into an epimorphism followed by a monomorphism.

Don’t understand the salamander lemma, it’s proof and its importance.

Don’t fully understand Borcherds complete computation of Tor over finitely generated abelian groups.

Why are finitely generated abelian groups a direct sum of the cyclic groups? What is the definition of finitely generated abelian groups?

What is the left adjoint of the random variable functor? It seems to forget some set of real numbers and converts it into outcomes? 

What are the key properties of Tor and Ext and how do you remember them?

Why in the last step in the construction of Tor or Ext do you take homology?

What are lifts and where does the duality of projective resolutions and injective resolutions come from?

Why are taking resolutions the key step before defining a functor so that you can get long exact sequences?

Why can’t constructs in commutative algebra like rings, ideals (functor from group conjugation), be directly expressed in terms of functors? https://math.uchicago.edu/~amathew/chthreeimportantfunctors.pdf

Don’t understand measurable functors and the fact that the realisation of a probability law is a natural transformation from the random variable functor to the measurable functors? Where in the construction do you want the measurable functor to use the axiom of dependent choice?

What is a list of diagram lemmas?

What are inductive systems and why should I care about formal filtered colimits? Ncat says that large categories are equivalent to inductive categories and are hence accessible in some sense of the word?

I don’t really fully understand the effectiveness of diagrams.

How is Gelfand duality related to the Stone Weierstrass theorem and how is Peter Johnstones book talking about this? See ncat page on Stone spaces.

What is the McKay correspondence between Dublin diagrams, platonic splits, finite subgroups of the special orthogonal group in three dimensions, finite subgroups of the special unitary group, and the simple Lie group. Why should I care about the McKay correspedoence?

Are there group extensions of subgroups to proper groups? Is there a word for this? This is similar to field extensions?

Also how does one explain that using a proper Klelisi or Eilenberg-Moore category gives Markov chains? What are the differences?

What are spin groups and how are they related to physics?

What are a list of special functors in homological algebra, Ext, Tor, Ind???

https://youtu.be/PHm4bYziyug?feature=shared
I don’t understand Scholze definition of cohomology and why is it easier to use? https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/54752/sheaf-cohomology-what-is-it-and-where-can-i-learn-it
Akhil Mathew gives an immediate explanation of this. https://mathoverflow.net/questions/38966/what-is-sheaf-cohomology-intuitively

Why is defining the opposite category of opens an open problem? It is not really Stone spaces or spatial frames.

I understand why do we care about derived functors (enough injectives), but how to we understand it? Scholze uses it to give a very clean definition of etale cohomology and what does this even mean? Example: cohomology is the right defined functor from the “abelian space” (specifically spectra) and getting an abelian group. Note that abelian groups are a fully faithful inclusion into cohomology. What does it mean by enough injectives? Sheaf cohomology is the right derived functor to the global section functor?
Answer; this is Grothendieck’s genius to use a functor for any coefficient. More specifically any functor as coefficients. 

How are anima a generalisation of homotopy types?

What are projective objects and projective resolutions?

How are resolutions both an exact sequence of modules and objects in an abelian category?

What does it mean for something to be accessible?

What is left exact localisations and why should we care about them?

How does one make it easy to define frames particularly the distribution of joints and meets apart from using infimum and supremum?

Profinite space: inverse limit of finite space gives subspace topology of the product? What is the subspace topology and what does this mean?

I do not understand the inverse limit completion of the ring of integers modulo prime powers.

What is the functor that works on opens that is the colimit of open overs on a product open covers over equalisers / descent such that applying this functor on a presheaf gives a separated sheaf, applying this functor again gives sheafification? Also how do we use separated morphisms in the definition.

What are sifted colimits?

Make sense of essentially algebraic as set^C with C lex, coherent topoi as first order, geometric as topoi. 

What is a classifying topos?

What does it mean for a first order languages? Sort, terms, and formulas?

Locales are the right adjoints of topological spaces by the functor or the opposite category of frames? Is this correct?

What is weakly Kan injective?

https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/Gelfand+duality Gelfand duality, why do we care about Gelfand duality when others exist? What are some motivating examples of Gelfand duality? It just seems like a broad categorisation example topology to commutative algebra and algebraic geometry to commutative rings. What is the difference between this and Isbell duality which is also about algebra and geometry? Isbell seems to be about sheafification and form of spectra, whereas Gelfand is more direct and about algebraic structures and some topology/geometry?

I don’t understand how a copresheaf expresses quantity where a presheaf expresses space by probing. What Ncat did was to express it as some internal hom between sets of quantities and values then gets the copresheaf as some covariant functor from copresheaves to set. The contravariant functor is the spectrum operations, from presheaves to set, the covariant functor is the copresheafification (whatever that is)
https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/space+and+quantity

I don’t understand why how symmetric monoidal tensor products as left adjoints of internal hom and internal Hom as right adjoints for symmetric monoidal tensor products must be the correct valid notion.

What is the motivation behind a diagonal morphism, and why should we care about separated morphisms so much it warrants its own functor adjunction?

https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/space+and+quantity
How does one understand Isbell duality between space and quantity in terms of topoi?

https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/Tannaka+duality how can one use the proof of Tannaka duality that groups are represented by automorphisms.

https://golem.ph.utexas.edu/category/2009/03/firstorder_logical_duality.html
How can use ultracategories and ultrafunctors as geometric objects in our head to express the duality between syntax and semantics of first order logic?

What is the syntax and semantics of first order logic? And how does Makkai duality clarify this?

What are centralisers of group elements?

How are vector bundles equivalent to class groups?

How does one draw the ring of dual numbers?

https://xorshammer.com/2011/07/09/a-logical-interpretation-of-some-bits-of-topology/
Try to understand Lebesgue covering dimension.

Why does checking structured morphisms of schemes require a base change?

Semidecidable logic as some sort algebra does not make sense to me as an analogy to topological space, shouldnt it be one counter example to disprove in finite time? Then looking at many examples to prove in infinite time? Or is this the converse?

Zariski site, you have a thin single ply of tissue with some notion of gluing, inclusion, lattices? Etale site will have multiply ply, collapse Galois actions together to get some Zariski site. What is the relation between Galois actions and sites?

Contravariance of universal property, example: there is a unique map from scheme S to spectrum of Z, scheme S can be represented by this unique map. The proof relies on the fact that there is a unique (ring) homomorphism from the integers to any other ring. This is contravariant! Why is that? Can we complete this proof so that it clarifies what is going on. Note, a ring is an abelian group with an additional monoidal structure given by tensor product?

What problem did introducing the symmetric group with equivariance solve? Is it related to Cayley’s theorem and Yoneda stuff?

Suspension isomorphisms: key ingredient in Mayer Vietoris sequence and long exact sequences? Why?

What are representable functors as upper sets or posets?

What is finite type, finite presentation?

What are some nasty examples when we fail to consider regular or smooth schemes (other than obvious nilpotent stuff)

Why are symmetric spectra pointed? Why define some equivariance with symmetric group?

What is an etale fundamental group?

What is unramified morphism?

Why should I care about the differences between free, projective, flat and torsion free

What does it mean for types to be Kan complexes and dependent types to be a Kan Fibration? Are dependent types some sort of function?

What are the analogies of higher inductive types with homotopy theory?

What is the difference between flat and locally free (locally have some basis?)

What is an infinity projective 1 loop space 

What does it mean for a Cartesian closed category to be closed by exponentiation? Exponentiation is some sort of function from the power to the base right?

Why do we care about presentability and subobject classifiers in topoi?

What is an exponential?

What is a Zariski constant?

What does locally Cartesian closed have to do with dependent types!

What is a De Morgan algebra?

What is a freely distributed lattice?

What is a Postnoikov tower and how is it related to a Whitehead tower?

What is an Eilenberg Maclane spectrum?

What is a smooth scheme?

What is a moving lemma?

What is a frame transfer?

Why should I care about Severi Brauer varieties?

What is a quasi coherent sheaf?

What is an Azumaya algebra?

What is a Morita equivalence?

What is a perfect base field?

What is etale topology, fppf topology? Sites? What is an easy to remember definition of sites other than the fibre product?

What is Morava K theory?

What is presentable and subobject classifier in topos?

How is tensor product related to smash product?

What is exponential?

What is Galois group and why does a symmetric monoidal stable infinity 1 category suitable for this?

Why are Galois extensions normal and separable? Why are these the right ones. 

What is Cartesian closed?

What is an etale fundamental groups?

https://mathoverflow.net/questions/394054/why-stable-infty-categories/394056#394056

http://www.math.uni-bonn.de/people/schwede/SymSpec-v3.pdf

https://mathoverflow.net/questions/301780/entering-to-the-k-theory-realm/301797#301797

Is there a compilation of all varieties drawings from Mumford book that somebody has drawn out with clear explanations?

What is Nisnevich descent, etale descent, ???
You have some sort of topology you want that is not like the typical topology, since they are somewhat disconnected, certain glueing exists. This motivates these forms of descent, topologies…

Is there a simpler definition of symmetric ring spectra that I can fit in my head AND DO COMPUTATIONS WITH? I don’t like the fact I have to vaguely point at some equivariance under symmetric groups, and then define spectra with stable homotopy suspension colimit thing. 

What are function spaces that you can fit in your head?

Don’t understand what are covering sieves, local isomorphisms and separated presheaves?

How on earth do you work snake lemmas, five lemmas, magic diagrams. Do not understand motivation?
https://angyansheng.github.io/notes/homological-algebra-i

Don’t understand how to keep it in head? Kunneth formula. Duality

I realised a lot of classical algebraic topology still appear? Need to go back and learn it. These are for example Kunneth formula, Eilenberg Maclane spaces…

Horizontal categorification, groups, Groupoids, monoids, category??? Why are some so useful? Groupoids become more than one object.

What is a quiver? Definition

Empty set: $(1)$ as ideal or the unit ideal. Useful in showing (quasi)compactness of Zariski topology?

I still don’t understand cohomology other than it is some sort of dual to homology, it is a generalisation of an abelian group, it has some coefficients.

Flatness: Let $f : X \rightarrow S$ be a morphism of schemes, and assume that $S$ is reduced. What is reduced?
(i) If $S$ is a smooth curve then $f$ is called (geometrically) flat if no 
component of $X$ is mapped to a single point in $S$. 
Here by component we mean an irreducible or embedded component, 
i.e. (in the affine picture) the subvarieties of $X$ occurring in the 
primary decomposition of the ring that defines $X$. Why does this make sense?

How do you use Kan extensions to do all of (classical) category theory quickly in your head? I have notes for this.

Function types are the same as internal homs. Internal logic of the category as function type. Make this make sense? https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/internal+logic

What are finite limits, Cartesian closed, and subobject classifiers?

I read somewhere that there is perfectoid spaces are a third group of all but I cannot remember?

Principal ideal domain corresponds to the spectrum looking like an affine line. How is this related to Z as PID from classification of surfaces?

Localisation of quotients and taking of quotients of localisations are equivalent, and they both give a residue field. What is the geometric interpretation of this?

Hilbert's Weak Nullstellensatz shows that the “traditional points” 
are present as points of the scheme, and this carries over to any algebraically closed field. 
If the field is not algebraically closed, the traditional points are glued together into clumps by Galois conjugation, as in real affine line and the affine line over $F_p$. How does this even work?

Why is it not possible for judgemental equalities to be proven?

How to understand pullbacks and monomorphisms intuitively in the subobject classifier definition?

What is the Freudenthal suspension theorem and how is it used to define spectra?

What does it mean for loop space and suspensions to be adjoints (suspension left adjoint, loop space right adjoint)?

How do I compute homologies my head with practice exercises?