UNDERSTOOD

Sigma-algebra: motivation is probability, closed under complements, countable unions and intersections. Complements because of not event, closure of countable unions and intersections because of stone duality, corresponding to probability of countably infinitely many events (ergodicity without killing rate) being decidable in logic. If you take sigma-semiring, this can be used in ergodic analysis in my opinion.

Algebras are closed under finite unions and intersections, need not be closed under countably many, see example take Boolean algebra, infinite negation corresponds to Grandi series, truth is not decidable, then apply Stone duality, corresponds to Grandi series -1 + 1 - 1 + 1 - 1…

Compactness: every open cover admits finite sub cover. WARNING: single cover of X is finite, so insufficient for definition. A set that is closed and totally bounded (corresponding to not admitting rotations about infinitely many axes) is compact. Rotations also cause Banach Tarski paradox.

Hahn decomposition: Measure space X under signed measure can be decomposed into disjoint union of positive and negative sets P and N, up to differences in sets of measure zero. Proof: assume measure v cannot take -infty as a value, otherwise take -v without loss of generality. v(Pj) tends to supremum m, however a measure is continuous from above. Consider countable collections of Pj. By an additional lemma, countable unions of positive sets are positive, therefore P is positive. Take N = X - P. Assume nonnegative for contradiction. Note, if we have non null set E inside N, we can take union of P and E and take its measure and it exceeds supremum. Contradiction. Secondly, for A in N v(A) > 0, if B subset of A then v(B) = v(A) + k, k real number. Now for construction, consider collections of nj such that v(Aj+1) = v(Aj) + 1/nj for lowest integer n1, inductively define. Consider countably many intersections of this Aj collection, gives nj tends to infinity. Yet, the rule still applies due to point number 2, so there exist a n > nj even though nj tends to infinity. Contradiction in constructability. See stack exchange or Folland for full proof I am not sure about the last step.

Jordan decomposition: v = v+ - v-, which says a signed measure can be constructed from two positive measures called the positive and negative variations. Proof: take v+(E) = v(E intersect P) and v-(E) = -v(E intersect N), this is possible by Hahn decomposition. Note that these variations are mutually singular i.e. there exists E, F in M such that E, F disjoint, E union F whole space, v+(E) measure 0, v-(F) measure 0. Prototypical example are the positive and negative real axis with minimum 0.

Caratheodory definition of integral: define outer measure, measure m(S) = m(S intersect A) + m(S intersect Ac) are family of countable sets, forming sigma algebra. Intuition is from Lebesgue measure, outer measure = inner measure.

Radon-Nikodym idea: pick nu, sigma-finite signed measure, mu sigma-finite positive measure, then there exists two unique measure lambda and rho such that lambda and rho are mutually singular, rho << mu (what does this mean?) and nu = sigma + rho. Example, pick mu = Lebesgue measure, pick measure space as real n-dim vector space with open balls, can define point wise derivative if nu.

isProp is the dependent product of the identity types of all pairs of elements in type. We say type A is a (-1)-truncated type or a h-proposition if isProp is an inhibited type, or there is a path between pairs of points for all pairs of points in the space of sections. https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/mere+proposition there are several provable equivalent ways about thinking.

Higher inductive type on X: A maps to F(A), group operation, unital invertible associative magma with identify and inverses.

Reflexive: space of sections of fibrations on same point. If there exists a proof a, then proof a is the same as proof a.

Symmetric: space of sections of fibrations (a,b) transported over function space to fibrations (b,a). If there exists proof a and proof b being the same, then proof b and proof a are the same.

Transitivity: space of sections of product space of fibrations (a,b) (b/c) can be moved to a(c) via a function space. There exist a predicate with if proof a is the same as proof b, and proof b is the same as proof c, so proof a is the same as proof c.

Intervals: generated by points of type segments and a path of type 0_I = 1_I. Recursion principle looks basically the same.

Circles: is of the type of base S1 and a loop of base =\_S1 base. Note that loop is not the refl_base.

Suspension: point north meridian of type suspension, point right meridian of suspension, and function meridian from the main space in a function space to the space where N = S in the suspension.

Cell complex higher inductive type: points in torus, and points p : b = b, points q: b = b, 2 path where you have p q = q p commutative, this makes it look like some naturality square between vertices a b c d. Identifying this produces a torus

Pushouts: generated by left injection from A to disjoint sum A U B, and right injection from B to disjoint sum A U B, and for each c: C, a glue that glue lefts inverses of functions of points on left injections of c with right injections of c. Left injections and right injection map to disjoint union (colimit inutitively)

W-type: give A in universe U and function type of A to universe U, A are labels, natural numbers as W-type, it will be the type 2 inhibited by 0_2 and 1_2, either it is 0, or it is a successor. So a W type is a generalisation of lists, numbers, binary tree. So 0_2 is the initial element, 1_2 is the induction principle.

N-algebra, type with two elements over the dependent pair c0: C and cs: C -> C, with the type of the dependent sum of product type of C \* (C->C). Example: N-algebra (N, 0, such).

0-type: no inductive generators

1-type: inductively generated by constructor \* of type 1.

Coproduction: generated by left inverse and right inverse, co-product of space, unions,

Surjective: a function is surjective if all fibres of are inhibited, there exists over the codomain space B there must be an induced element over the domain space A such that we have f(a) = b and these two are inhibited.

Interesting, connectedness means that the unique function from a space A to the 1-type space 1 for all dimensions, fibres of maps are contractible. Every function is (-2) connected, up to level of propositions. (-1)-connectedness means surjectivity. This generalised higher level subjectivity. 0-connected is connected, 1-connected is simply connected. This gives the generalisation of connectivity in terms of dimension.

Contractible maps: a map is contractible if it is contractible over all the fibres of a point in the total space.

Left inverse and right inverse: these are the dependent sum over the induced map of spaces B to A such that the g f is homotopy to idA as points for left inverse, g quasi inverse, then f g is homotopy to idB in points for right inverse. A map is bi-invertible if it has a left inverse and a right inverse.

Fiber of a map: this is dependent sum such that fibres over an element x in map f is equal to y where x is of type A, y is of type B. In space, this means the total space where maps of points y are equal to points of map y. It is easy to visualise, just pick two points in space, and then the thing connecting them is the fiber of the map.

Types are object classifiers.

Function types are internal Hom.

Quasiinverse: lemma and proof, quasi inverses are equivalent to dependent types with (x = x). In space, quasi inverses are equivalent to the space of sections where points are equal to points?

Sets are one types where points for points x and y in space A, p, q are of space x = y, and r, s are points of space p = q, therefore r = s in points. Some sort of Poincare duality taking lines as space, and point as points.

Contractible type: logically it means that there exists for all proofs, proofs are identical to the proof being the center of contraction i.e. all proofs are the same. A space is contractible if there is a total space of the space of sections such that all points are equivalent to the point known as the center of contraction.

Retraction is a function space from spaces A to B such that there exists a function space from B to A known as it section, as well as a homotopy such that the compositions of function spaces on points in the space of sections exists.

Unit type is the terminal object.

Dependent pair of P(x): logically it is subset, these are defined as subtype, therefore the total space of fibrations is a

Fiberwise mapping: dependent product from P(x) to Q(x), space of sections from two fibrations,

Dependent pair type of sigma types: a type of pairs where it varies based on the second component without using currying

Recursor for magma: dependent PAIR product (note that the dependent pair product is doing a lot of heavy lifting) A to A to A. Logically, this refers to an associativity principle, where for all propositions, implications of propositions can be taken in any order for a triplet of implications. Spatially, this means that we take the coproduct of three function spaces over the same space, this can be done in any order.

Recursor for pointed magma: Same thing as a recursor of a magma but with a product type at the end.

Induction principle for co-products:

Induction over unit type: (1) skip step 1, (2) construct for function type of unit type to universe, the dependent type of a point C(\*), (3) this is the function type to the dependent type over the unit type

Induction of product types: (1) take dependent type of pairs C(x,y) over elements x in universe X and elements y over universe Y; (2) take dependent type over function types of product type from X _ Y -> U; (3) take a function type to dependent product to the element u of type X _ Y for a proposition C(u).
Logically, (1) consider a pair of proofs x and y, there exist a proof x that proves propositions X and proof in propositions Y. Consider this pair of propositions for where the (2) conjunction of these two proofs imply U. (3) It is implied that the pair of proofs can be treated as a proof on its own.
In spaces: (1) consider the product space of two points (x,y) formed by the space of sections over their base space X and Y. Then consider the space of sections over the function space of their base space as a product space X \* Y to some other space U; (3) one can form the function space to the product space itself which associate this pair of points to a single point.

Proof for propositional uniqueness principle

Negation: function type into empty type. See section 3.7.1 for traditional logical notation.

Law of the excluded middle: either A or not A is not valid in intuitionism. In intuitionism, either a statement is provable or cannot be provable to be false, or false. Statement p is stronger than not not p. In type theory, this corresponds to the idea that there is no function type from a type to empty type to empty type again. It fails spectacularly in set theory since it implies the De Morgans laws are not valid. In homotopy theory, it corresponds to the statement that there is no function space of the function space of a space.

LEM can be defined as the dependent product of isprop(A) -> (A or not A). It is also the space of sections of the function space of function isprop(A) to disjoint sum of space A and space not A. Logically, the interpretation is easiest, for all statements, if they are propositions then it implies that it must be either true or it is not true but not both.

Type of boolean: coproduct of two one pointed space, set of two singletons, true and false

Boolean recursor: logically this is if then else, in type theory, Pi_C C to C to 2 to C, where 2 is type of booleans, in sets this means there are function spaces from families of the same set (truth and negation) which map to either truth or false which maps to each statement. Topologically there is a space of sections of product spaces of a space as a function space that maps to the two point set for each space.

0-Recursor, Pi_0 C -> C, space of sections over the empty space is a space, any set is a family of functions on the empty set. Logically, any false statement implies any statement.

Coproduct type: defined by type of recursor of coproduct A + B, which is the union of sets, disjunction in logic, and coproduct of spaces.

Recursor of coproducts: known as case analysis. Functions of A to C to functions of B to C are functions of A+B a function of C. Logically, it means that there exists a proposition if A implies C, that implies B implies C, this implies A or B implies C. In sets, there is a family of functions with common codomain can be made into a family of functions with the same codomain using a function. Topologically, space of sections function spaces to the same space can be made into a coproduct with the same function space to the same space.

Recursor through unit type; the recursor from Pi C to 1 to C. Logically, it means there exists for proposition C that is true and implies proposition C. In sets; there exists a set with one element which is the set. Topologically, there is a space of sections whose function spaces maps it to basepoint which has a function space that maps it to the same space of sections.

Nullary type: type in universe with only one object, space with one point, proposition with only one proof, set with one element denoted by empty set, terminal object.

Swap; triple dependent product of elements over the same universe A to B to C such that it becomes B to A to C. In logic, it means that there exists a propositions A implying proposition B implying proposition C such that there is a proposition B implying A which then implies C. In sets, it means there is a family of functions such that family A is a function of family B is a family C with a function making it such that family B is a function of family A which is a function of family C. Topologically, there is a space of sections such that the function spaces of A to B to C has a function space making it function spaces from B to A to C.

Polymorphic functions over universe: functions that take types as arguments and acts on elements of that type.

Cartesian product: type constructed by the recursor of dependent type. Example: generates product space A and B from function spaces of A, B, C.

Recursor of dependent types: function of types from dependent type of functions of types A to B to C, to functions of types A \* B, to C. Logically, it is the recursion principle such that there exists a proposition A implying proposition B implying proposition C, such that implies it is propositions A and B implying C. As sets, it means that there exists a family of families of sets of functions A, B and C, such that the intersection of families A and B gives the set family C. Topologically, it means that there exists a space of sections of function spaces from A to B to C, such that the product space A and B is a function space of C.

Projections of dependent types: type of functions from the product type to one of its components with idempotence as the defining eliminator. In sets, it means there exists a two proofs (a,b) which implies one of proofs is a proof. In sets, it means there is a family of two sets and a family of functions that selects one set out of the two. In homotopy, there is a space of sections on a product space whose function space gives a space that is one of the two spaces.

Product type: left adjoint to type of functions

Eta-expansion: judgemental uniqueness principle

Classical homotopy: continuous totally ordered family of maps graded by intervals such that compositions of maps at the endpoint is idempotent.

Isbell duality: space is dual to algebra.

Types: infinity groupoid, terminal object of a global section functor for an (infinity,1) category.

Identity type: path space A^I from interval to space A.

Universe: type whose elements are types. Hierarchy of universes prevent Russell’s paradox.

Univalence: isomorphic structures can be identified or there is a canonical equivalence for the function space of id applied to function space of A and B to equiv applied to function space of spaces A and B

Type of naturals: constructed using zero and successor as the induction principle.

Higher inductive types: constructions built using induction principles.

Sets: homotopy equivalent to discrete space where every connected component is contractible.

isomorphisms: Iso(A,B) are dependent pairs of over A -> B and B -> A over dependent types of g(f(x)) = x and f(g(y)). Homotopically, they refer to symmetric total spaces of function spaces with defining equations being space of sections that have judgemental equalities between the composition of functions with their inverses and the identity.

0-types: sets, proofs

1-types: propositions

Types: propositions, sets, space

Proofs: elements, points in space

Predicates, B(x), families of sets, or fibration

0-1, true false, initial and terminal objects

A \* B, disjunction, sets of pairs, product space

A -> B, B^A, implication, sets of functions, function space

Sigma types or dependent sum types, there exists, disjoint sum, total space

Pi types or dependent product type, for all, product, space of sections from total space E to base space Sigma. Cartesian product over types.

Space of sections: internal hom where codomain depends on domain and internalises indexed products. Exponentiation of two natural numbers identified with product of copies of power. Categorify this, you get space of sections. Picking terminal morphisms gets the exponential object.

First order deduction: proposition has a proof.

Propositionally equal: there exists x such that x : a =\_A b. In logic, this means there exists a proof x where proof a is proof b given proposition A. In homotopy, if there is a point x in the space a =\_A b for space A, then there is a path between points a and b in space A. Logically, it means that x is an set in the family of sets where a and b are equal elements.

Definitionally equal: there exists a variable a = b in type A. Logically, it means there exists a proof or axiom of a = b in proposition A. In sets, it means that the elements a and b are the same in set A. Topologically, it means there exists a path from a to b in space A. Compare this to propositional equality geometrically, where the space a =\_A b has paths as points.

Function type, f has a type A -> B. Logically, f is a proof that A implies B. In sets, f is in the set of functions from A to B or the exponential set B^A. In homotopy, point f is in the function space A -> B.

Hypothesis: element x has type A. Logically, x is a proof of A as a statement is a hypothesis. Set theory wise, element x is in the set A. In homotopy, point x is in space A.

Lambda-abstraction: of the form lambda (element: type)-expression.
Logically, it refers to the expression that shows that x is a proof of a proposition A. Sets, it means at an expression such that an element is a member of that sets. Topologically, it means that this expression defines points to be some space.

Element to expression is of functional type. Logically, it means a proof implying an expression is an implication of propositions. Set wise, it means an element with an expression is a family of functions. Topologically it means that a function space can be defined by points to expressions as points.

Currying: apply function to a, then apply function of a to b, then get the result. Logically, it means proof an implies fa, then proving proposition fa implies b, then b is a result. Set theoretically, it means element a is in the set of functions fa, which is in the set of functions b. Topologically, it means from point a, there is a path to fa, which then there is a path to b, so there is a path from a to b.

Inductive principle for the type of functions: this means that an expression is canonically isomorphic to the lambda (element: type)-expression. Logically, it means an expression is the same thing as applying an expression of a proof with some proposition. Sets, it means a set defined by its properties is equivalent to the property itself. Topologically, it means that an expression as a space is the same as an expression defining some points on some space to be a space.

Formation rules: rules that form types:

Eliminator rules: rules that apply expressions.

Characteristic equation: take the determinant map (lambda I - A) x = 0, there is some sort of group theory since the characteristic equation is equal to the power series with alternating signs of principle minor sums, or t^n - (tr A) t^{n-1} … (-1)^A (det A).

Sum of roots and product of roots as trace and determinant. For a 2x2 matrix, trace and determinant has something to do with sum of roots, product of roots; We have x^2 - tx + d, -t is trace, d is determinant.

Similarity: B is similar to A if there exists nonsingular S such that B = S^-1 A S.

Diagonalisable: if similar to diagonal matrix, then diagonalisable.

Matrices AB commute if they are simultaneously diagonal or similar to same diagonal matrix. Proof: use similarity transform, forms abelian subgroup. Same group action on group conjugate, also abelian.

Eigenvalue equation: Ax = lambda x. Converts matrices into polynomial ring.

Unitary matrices are nonsingular, its conjugate inverse is unitary. Rows and columns are orthonormal, same Euclidean norm. Proof, all follows under closure of unitary group, and also the fact that the product of unitary matrices is 1.

Selection principle, closed bounded subset of finite dimensional vector space is compact (note that unitary matrices have a spectrum closed in complex unit disk). Group of unitary disk is compact, so there must exist a limit of subsequence. Need not be unique! Similar to {-1}^n odd and even alternating matrices as counterexample!

Unitary similarity is equivalence relation: proof is easy, identity matrix, inverses and composition of inverses exist in the group of unitary matrices, so can form equivalence relation if you use these as products.

Schur form: proof: start with orthonormal basis matrices A = [Z1 Z2] \* A [Z1 Z2] which gives [lambda I, A12, 0, A22]. The lambda I, 0 is due to the properties of the orthonormal basis matrices being unitary, don’t care about A12, but A22 is not upper triangular! Iterate. Finite dim vector space have integer dimension n, iteration at most n steps, therefore any square matrix in complex numbers is unitary similar to upper triangular matrix.

A unitary matrix is a matrix whose inverse is equal to its conjugate transpose.
The product of a matrix with its inverse gives the identity matrix.
A conjugate transpose of a matrix swaps the rows and columns and
computes its complex conjugate component wise.

A square complex matrix $A$ in the set of $n$ by $n$ matrices $M_n$ of complex entries
have eigenvalues $\lambda_1, ... \lambda_n$ in any order.
Let $x$ in the complex n-space $\mathbf{C}^n$ be a unit vector such that
$Ax = \lambda_1 x$.

There is a unitary $U =  [x u_2 ... u_n]$ in the set of $n$ by $n$ matrices $M_n$
such that $U^* A U = T = [t_{ij}]$ is upper triangular with diagonal entries $t_ii = \lambda_i$ from $i = 1, ..., n$. This is the Schur form.

The upper triangular matrix $T$ has the diagonal entries as the eigenvalues of $A$,
the sum of these eigenvalues as the trace of $A$, the product of these eigenvalues
as the determinant of $A$, and the main diagonal entries of $\mathrm{adj} T$
to be the product of all eigenvalues excluding the one corresponding to the
entry in the diagonal or $\prod^n_{j \neq 1} t_{jj}, ..., \prod^n_{j \neq n} t_{jj}$.

The Cayley-Hamilton theorem follows by factorising the characteristic polynomial
and representing the matrix $A$ by the conjugacy $UTU^*$.
The characteristic equation of $A$ is that of the conjugacy which is
$Up_A(T)U^* = U([T - \lambda_1 I][T - \lambda_2 I]...[T - \lambda_n I])U^*$.
One can check that $p_A(T)$ in this form must be zero (NOT TRIVIAL, see
Horn and Johnson, pp. 110).

A square complex matrix $A$ in the set of $n$ by $n$ matrices $M_n$ of complex entries
have scalars $\lambda_1, ... \lambda_n$ in the complex
plane $\mathbf{C}$, positive integers $q$
and $n_1, ..., n_q$ such that the sum $n_1 + ... + n_q = n$
such that $A = S J_A S^{-1}$
where the Jordan matrix $J_A$
is the direct sum of Jordan blocks $J_{n_i}(\lambda_i)$, where
$J_A = \bigoplus^{q}_{i = 1} J_{n_i}(\lambda_i)$.

A Jordan block is an upper triangular matrix where the the scalar $\lambda_i$
appears $n_i$ times on the main diagonal, if $n_1 > 1$ then there are $k - 1$
entries which are $+1$ in the superdiagonal, and all other entries are zero.

The number of Jordan blocks is the maximum number of linearly independent eigenvalues of $J_A$.

If all the Jordan blocks are 1 by 1, then $J_A$ is diagonalisable, in fact, the diagonal matrix looks like this.

The number of Jordan blocks corresponding to a given eigenvalue is the geometric
multiplicity of the eigenvalue, which is the dimension of the associated eigenspace.

The sum of the sizes of all the Jordan blocks corresponding to a given eigenvalue is its algebraic multiplicity.

A Jordan block is the sum of a diagonal matrix and a nilpotent matrix
since $J_k(\lambda) = \lambda I_k + J_k(0)$ and $J_k(0)^k = 0$.

Category theory motivates (1) generalising morphisms;
(2) generalising domain/codomain duality;
(3) preserve integrity respecting identification and compositional order.
The fastest illustration of category theory is with Kan extensions.
All categories are locally small (that is to say ignore size issues in set theory) unless otherwise stated.

A category $\mathbf{C}$ have
domain and codomain objects $ob(\mathbf{C})$ and morphisms $mor(\mathbf{C})$
that respect the identity $\mathbf{1_C}$ and associative composition.
A morphism is between categories is a
functor $F$ maps morphisms $f$ from a category $\mathbf{C}$ to a category $F\mathbf{C}$
respecting composition $F(f \cdot_{\mathbf{F}} c) \rightarrow F(f) \cdot_{F\mathbf{C}} F(c)$
and identification in both categories.
One can also use the family of homs definition, used in May or Lurie.

A 2-morphism of functors is natural transformation
$\eta$ that has components $\alpha_c$ that takes morphism $c$
composed by a functor $F$ to a functor $G$ such that
there is a commutative diagram between the morphism $Fc$ and
its common composite $Gc'$ for any morphism $f$ that takes $c$ to $c'$
($Gf \cdot \alpha_c = \alpha_{c'} \cdot Ff$).

An isomorphism is a composition of two morphisms between two sets of
objects whose composition and inverse identify in their respective sets of objects.
Objects are isomorphic if an isomorphism between two exist between them.
Objects can be grouped into a class of objects of a category if they are isomorphic.
Picking the same object for the domain and codomain gives an automorphism if the morphism is isomorphism, otherwise it is endomorphisms.

A comma category $F \downarrow G$ of two functors $F: \mathbf{D} \rightarrow \mathbf{C}$
and $G: \mathbf{E} \rightarrow \mathbf{C}$
has objects, triples $(d, e, f)$, where $d$ is a morphism in category $\mathbf{D}$,
$e$ is a morphism in category $\mathbf{E}$, and $f$ which are morphisms from $Fd \rightarrow Ge$
in category $\mathbf{C}$, as well as all diagrams of this shape commuting in category $\mathbf{C}$,
where $h: d \rightarrow d'$, $k: e \rightarrow e'$ such that $f' \cdot Fh = Gk \cdot f$,
for morphisms of triples $(d, e, f) \rightarrow (d', e' ,f')$.

A left Kan extension of a functor $F$ that takes morphisms from initial domain
category $\mathbf{C}$ to a codomain category $\mathbf{E}$
along a functor $K$ that maps morphisms from extended domain $\mathbf{D}$ to
the same codomain category $\mathbf{E}$
is a functor $\mathrm{Lan}_{K} F$ that also takes morphisms from category $\mathbf{D}$ to category $\mathbf{E}$
such that there is a natural transformation $\eta$ that takes functor $F$ to the functorial
composition of $\mathrm{Lan}_{K} F \cdot K$. This natural transformation $\eta$
is defined such that any other natural transformation $\gamma$ factors uniquely through $\eta$ for any other
functor $K'$ that, like $K$, takes morphisms from category $\mathbf{D}$ to category $\mathbf{E}$.
A right Kan extension is defined the same but the arrows of the natural
transformation reversed, taking the functorial
composition of $\mathrm{Ran}_{K} F \cdot K$ to functor $F$ from the opposite category
$\mathbf{C}^\mathrm{op}$ to opposite category $\mathbf{E}^\mathrm{op}$ when defined in terms
of the left Kan extension.

A functor is extended naturally to left composition of a left Kan extension and the functor when the domain category is extended.
A functor is extended naturally from a left composition of a right Kan extension and the functor when the domain category is extended. Easy to remember, forgetful functors are typical examples of right adjoints which are right Kan extensions.

A presheaf is a functor from an opposite category to sets. A simplicial set is presheaf from the simplicial category.

A category of presheaves has presheaf functors as objects, and natural transformations as
morphisms.

Most Kan extensions define the value of an extended functor on each object (each “point”)
by a weighted (co)limit.
For a locally small category $\mathbf{E}$, a right Kan extension is pointwise if it is preserved
by all representable functors $\mathbf{E}(e, -)$ to the category of sets
$\mathbf{Set}$. Representable functors are naturally isomorphic with a representation
$\theta: \mathrm{hom}_\mathbf{C}(-,c) \rightarrow \mathbf{E}(e, -)$.
A left Kan extension is pointwise if its corresponding right Kan extension is pointwise.

Also, a right Kan extension of functor $F$ from category $\mathbf{C}$ to category $\mathbf{E}$
along a functor $K$ from category $\mathbf{C}$ to $\mathbf{D}$ is pointwise
if and only if the limit $\mathrm{lim} ( d \downarrow K \rightarrow \mathbf{C} \rightarrow \mathbf{E})$
exists and is isomorphic $\mathrm{Ran}_{K} F(d)$ for morphism $d$ in category $\mathbf{C}$.
We have $d \downarrow K$ as an indexing category.
This can be shown since a pointwise extension preserves representable functors, so Yoneda's lemma applies then the
$\mathrm{Ran}_{K} F(d)$ is isomorphic limit of $F\Pi_d: d \downarrow K \rightarrow \mathbf{E}$ where a l $\Pi_d$.
Dually, a left Kan extension of functor $F$ from category $\mathbf{C}$ to category $\mathbf{E}$
along a functor $K$ from category $\mathbf{C}$ to $\mathbf{D}$ is pointwise
if and only if the colimit $\mathrm{colim} ( K \downarrow d \rightarrow \mathbf{C} \rightarrow \mathbf{E} )$
exists and is isomorphic $\mathrm{Lan}_{K} F(d)$ for morphism $d$ in category $\mathbf{C}$.

% Improve on this.
See Emily Riehl's "Category Theory in Context" for this construction.
For any small diagram $F$ from category $\mathbf{C}$ to category $\mathbf{D}$ valued in a category
with products and equalisers. There exists an equaliser diagram for monomorphisms on $Fc$ to
the product $\Pi_{c \rightarrow x} Fx$ for two parallel maps to $\Pi_{c \rightarrow x \rightarrow y} Fy$.
One parallel map projects to the component indexed by the composite $c \rightarrow x \rightarrow y$.
The other parallel map projects to the component indexed by the map $c \rightarrow x$ and then acts by $F$
on the second map $x \rightarrow y$. This is the Yoneda lemma, applied to functor $F$ from the
category $\mathbf{C}$ to the category of sets $\mathbf{Set}$ for set morphisms $Fc$
which is isomorphic to a limit formula $\lim(c/\mathbf{C} \rightarrow \mathbf{C} \rightarrow \mathbf{D})$.
This limit formula can be shown to be expressed as an equaliser.
The Yoneda lemma states that these two composites are equivalent.

Yoneda's lemma implies a composition of two morphisms between two sets of
objects whose composition and inverse identify in their respective sets of objects
called a isomorphism. This isomorphism is canonical and unique, and is between
the value of a presheaf $X$ at a morphism $c$ and the collection of all morphisms
(hom-set) of presheaf homomorphisms
from the representable presheaf $y(c)$ to the presheaf $X$.
This means $\mathrm{Hom}_{\mathrm{Set}^{\mathbf{C}^\mathrm{op}}}(y(c), X)$
is isomorphic to $X(c)$.

A left Kan extension of a functor $F$ that takes morphisms from category $\mathbf{C}$ to category $\mathbf{D}$
along a uniqueness functor $!$ from
a category $\mathbf{C}$ to the category $\mathbf{1}$ defines a natural transformation
to the colimit. This left Kan extension exists if and only if the colimit exists.
A right Kan extension along a uniqueness functor $!$ from
a category $\mathbf{C}$ to the category $\mathbf{1}$ defines a natural transformation
from the limit. This right Kan extension exists if and only if the limit exists.

A unit $\eta$ is a natural transformation from the identity functor $\cdot$ to a composition
of functors $GF$. A left Kan extension of the identity functor $\cdot$
along $F$ is defined with the unit $\eta$ as an left adjoint. Left adjoints preserves colimits.
A counit $\epsilon$ is a natural transformation from a composition of
a functors $GF$ to the identity functor $\cdot$.
A right Kan extension of the identity functor along $G$ is defined with the counit $\epsilon$
as an right adjoint. Right adjoints preserves limits.

A Yoneda extension is a left Kan extension
along a Yoneda embedding.

A limit of a diagram with two objects without nontrivial morphisms is a product.
A limit of a unique empty diagram from the empty category $\mathbf{0}$ to a category $\mathbf{C}$
defines a terminal object of $\mathbf{C}$. This can be thought of as a product.
A limit of a pair of parallel morphisms is an equaliser.
A limit over a cospan is a pullback, considering pairs of morphisms with the same co-domain.
Dually, there are coproducts, initial objects, coequalisers, and pushouts for parallel pairs
of morphisms with the same domain.

Monoidal structure: a unital associative magma, except the magma is a tensor product BIFUNCTOR of categories. Unital and associativity come as FUNCTORS of categories.

Box topology: generated by the base of Cartesian product of opens for opens in topology. Box comes from basis sets that look like boxes. Standard counterexample to how products do not preserve continuity unless one uses the product topology.

Product topology: box topology but all but finitely many opens in components are equal to the full component space. The product of continuous functions (morphisms) are continuous iff the components of the product are continuous.

Affine combination versus convex combination: affine combination allows negative coefficients, line between them and is compact. Convex combination of a finite set is compact.

Measurement of random variable: defined when the exponential is taken out of an expectation value, you replace the random variable with the measured value. This is deterministic.

Mapping space of CW complex has type of CW complex: need domain compactness, example mapping from universal infinite discrete space to discrete space.

Germ: for open U and functor f, take image from i(U) from sheaves of opens on top space X OU(X) to cocone C, then G(u,f) is i(U)(f)

Perfect duality, equivalence of categories from opposite category C to D consisting of dual concrete structures

Heisenberg group: non abelian, every element cubed is 1

Exercise: if 0 to A to B to C to 0, if any two are exact then the third must be exact. Proof is to take long exact sequence of homology groups. Then, eventually most of them will vanish, show injection and surjection.

Eisenstein criterion, for polynomial, if there exists a prime does not divide the nth power coefficient yet it divides the rest, and prime square does not divide the zeroth term, then the polynomial is irreducible. Example: x^2 + 2, pick 2 as the prime not dividing 1, power of x^2, 0, and 4 but it divides the other term 2.

Uses of pseudometric: you have two points with 0 distance that aren’t the same. To ignore it, quotient out by identification with distance.

Duality: pairs of concepts are mirror images of one another with some involution like two points define a line and the intersection of two lines is a point up to taking projections.

Derived functors: explicit computations of homology for Tor, and cohomology for Ext via resolutions

Burnside’s lemma: enumeration of orbits of symmetry group, or counts distinct objects up to a symmetry equivalence relation.
For a finite group G, consider elements x^g that are fixed by g i.e. g = x = x. The formula for orbits is |X/G| = sum of elements x fixed by g divided by the group G. Example, rotationally distinct colourings of cube with three colouring. Identity fixes 3^6 colours, six 90 degree face rotations fix 3^3 \* 6 colourings, three 180 degree face rotations fix 3^3 colourings, eight 120 degree vertex rotation fix 3^2 colourings, six 180 degree edge rotations fix 3^3 colourings. Now take average over group of order 64, get 57, so there are 57 rotationally distinct colourings of a cube with 3 colours.

Fourier transforms in distribution theory: turn multiplication by x into differentiation with respect to k, derivatives of delta function.

Jaffard domain: Krull dimension of the ring of polynomials, is the Krull dimension of the ring + number of parameters of the polynomial ring. Example dim R[T1 … Tn] = dim R + n.

Lie group and Lie algebra correspondence: isomorphic Lie algebra does not imply isomorphic Lie group (example real coordinate space, and circle group). However, requires simple connectedness. Problem is there is a hole in circle group.

Schur’s lemma: all ground field, irreducible representations are unique up to homomorphism, if ground field is algebraically closed endomorphisms are scalar multiples of identity operator

Lp space: space using a power p as norm instead of typical Euclidean using p = 2

Hom Tensor adjunction on vector space: Hom(V,W) is canonically isomorphic to V\* tensor W.

Duality of vector space: a vector space of rulers (sort of) of a vector space. It is not canonical, one can pick an arbitrary scale.

Periodicity of functions: reducible to linear combinations of exp(2 pi it)

Quotients: f(x) = f(y) if x is equivalent to y. That is why quotients are very powerful. They are almost functions

Schur lemma: endomorphism of irreducible representation, multiply by complex number?

Linearising is the easiest thing in math (example, representation theory). Next best thing is to count.

Connectedness is not hereditary, example Q does not inherit connectedness from R or even path connectedness.

Normal subgroups: invariant under conjugation or serving as the identity for a different group compared to the rest of the elements. So I have the normal subgroup, then everything else not invariant under group conjugation. So the whole group is an identity somehow. Ideals of rings are comparable to normal subgroups?

Free group as universal property (universal left adjoint): there is a canonical free group, with any function from set S to the group G giving a unique isomorphism with set S included to the alphabet Fs mapping to the group G. If non unique, relations exist.

Maximal subgroup: proper subgroup that is not contained in any other proper subgroup. Note this implies that there can be nonunique maximal proper subgroups.

Proper subgroup: subgroup that is a proper subset of the group (particularly, excludes the group itself as a proper subgroup of a group)

Construction of Non-Noetherian rings for each finite dimension: start with a Noetherian ring, adjoin infinite number of nilpotents. Or take affine line, adjoin infinite number of fat points somewhere (Gelfand duality), the corresponding ring is not Noetherian even though it is dim 1.

Gros topos: sheaf is a generalised space with descent

Cuspoidal cubic: y^2 - x^3

Proof that every vector space has a norm: every vector space has a finite linear combination of basis vectors (even if it has infinite dimensions, this uses some weird completion magic). Take max of the coefficients amongst finitely many basis vectors, this defines one possible norm. Infinite dimensional TOPOLOGICAL vector spaces don’t have a norm that indices the topology

Exponential functions are quintessential examples of holomorphic functions

Unital subring: some authors define the identity to be in subring. Note that analysts don’t like forcing an identity at all.

Injective: covariant pullback, if f(x) = f(y) then x = y.

Well defined function: covariant pushforward, if x = y, then f(x) = f(y)

Sobolev embedding: amplitude A, frequency N, support on volume V. Wk,p norm is AN^kV^-p,
Apply uncertainty principle, V >= N^-d. Think of it as a trade off between regularity and interrability.
These are single bump function spaces, can extend a lot further.
W11(R)  =  L^infty(R1) is fundamental theorem of calculus
Wd1(R)  =  L^infty(Rd) is iterated and Fubini

Using calculus to get rid of bad fractions: newton numerators of form [f(t+h) - f(t)]/h is simply the integral

Utilities problem: F - E + V =  2. Consider 2 houses to 3 utilities fully done. Need to connect one house to all three utilities. Can make at most only one face on the plane. So max faces is 3. You have 9 edges, 6 vertices, this is a max of 0 which is less than 2. Therefore, fails in plane.

Trisection angle: impossible, proof, compass and straight edge constructions obey tower law, quadratics only. Consider cos(60 degree), which is rational valued, and expressed irreducible, cubic polynomial. cos(20) therefore cannot be constructed by tower law. But 60 degrees can be constructed. So it is impossible to trisect 60 degrees.

Smooth fibrations on compact spaces are fiber bundles, example Hopf fibration not Hopf fiber bundle.

Elliptical curve over complex numbers is a Riemann surface of genus one with base point, or quotient of complex of lattice
In complex, or smooth algebraic curve degree 3. Torus can be used to study complex numbers.

To get the properties of exclusive disjunction from ring sum and conjunction (or meet) from ring product given a Boolean ring, which is a ring of idempotents, apply truth table onto rings of ints modulo 2. 1 + 1 = 0, so exclusive disjunction.

Join is union both are less than supremum in lattice, meet is intersection is infimum, both are at least that in lattice.

Plus construction (see Scholze lecture): A+ is the Lan(r^op) Ran(s^op) A. Step 1, apply right point wise Kan extension along the opposite of functor s^op : C -> J sending opens U on small site C to maximal sieve (set of all morphisms with codomain U). Step 2: apply left pointwise Kan extension r: J -> C as Grothendieck construction of functor Cov: C^op to Pos or category of partially ordered sets. sending opens U to set of covering sieves.

Global section functor on an (infty, 1) topos is a Hom functor of morphisms out of the terminal object H(\*, -) from infinity stack sheaf of C to infinity stack sheaf of a terminal object which is an infinity groupoid. The infinity groupoid is the terminal object.

Global section functor is direct image functor on Grothendieck topos, induced by canonically mapping spaces to terminal objects. It is right adjoint to the left adjoint which is the Set tensor on the terminal object sending set to coproduct of card(S) copies of terminal object which is the constant object. The left adjoint is the constant sheaf. It is constant since we lost all information by using the terminal object. Generalisation of the forgetful functor.

Etale space: sheafs on the site of opens for topological space is the sheaf of local sections on its etale space E (double cover as example) bundle such that the sheaf functor takes opens U to sheaf of local sections Gamma*U(E).
The sheaf of global sections is the hom-sets on the sheaf from the terminal object to the sheaf functor.
Sheaf of global function = Hom_Sh(X)(*, A), A is sheaf functor, \_ terminal object, Sh(X) is sheaf category.

Sections are right inverses. Sections B -> A are right inverses of bundles A -> B which are left inverses of sections..
Sections typically refer to global sections, not local sections by default. In homotopy type theory, helpful for defining left injections and right injections.

Derived functors are normal functors that are presented in a category of weak equivalences (homotopy suitable setting).

Dehn twist: cut cylinder with line, glue back circle with rotation. Line becomes twisted at cut.

Mapping class group of torus is special linear group of 2 x 2 matrices, Teichmuller space is the upper half plane.
Horizontal Dehn twist, take shearing matrix A = (1 1, 0 1) giving (x+y, y) on (x, y).
Vertical Dehn twist, take shearing matrix B = (0 1, 1 1) giving (x, x+y) on (x, y).

Mapping class group: group of orientation preserving homeomorphisms of
oriented topological manifold, group of automorphic homeomorphisms onto itself modulo isotopy i.e.
MCG := Aut / Aut0. Nielsen Thurston classification.

Classification of surfaces: connected oriented finite type surfaces can be classified by punctures, genus, boundary. Classifying spaces encoded
combinatorially in category of ribbon graphs.

CW approximation theorem: for any space X, there is an induced map Y to X for some closure finite weak topology complex Y with induced isomorphism of homology, homotopy and cohomology groups.

Modular arithmetic: m divides a - b means a = b mod m, a dividend, b remainder, m divisor.

Coprime ideals: sum of coprime ideals give the full ring, There are coprime numbers, coprime ideals, coprime polynomials.

Bezout’s identity: linear combinations of integers are equal to their greatest common divisor i.e. au + bv = gcd(a,b). Proof: if u and v are coprime, Z as linear combination have 1 as unit vector so linear combination au/gcd(a,b)+ bv/gcd(a,b) = 1 since primes are orthogonal vectors on integers. Multiply by gcd(a,b) to get the result. Alternatively, apply Euclidean algorithm backwards using the fact that intersections of linear combinations with the integers must have minimal element (or gcd(a, b) is minimal). Since these are linear combinations, by induction linear combinations of scalars of primes are equal to the greatest common divisor of the scalars.

Fundamental theorem of equivalence relations: classes of equivalence relations either equal or disjoint but not both and one can some the cardinality of classes of equivalence relations. Proof: if disjoint we are done. Suppose not disjoint, construct equivalence from element in one set to element in other set, so they must be equal sets (used the fact that sets have no repeated elements). For cardinality relation, apply cardinality functor from category of Sets to category of Naturals taking union into sum.

Freyd-Mitchell embedding: small abelian categories embeds fully and exactly into the category of R-modules over suitable ring R

Brouwerian counterexample: statement implies principle that is non-constructive. Example: something implies Zorn’s lemma

Content free: statements that do not actually tell you anything new about something

Extensionality axiom, sets pictured as trees have unique branches

Foundation axiom, branches of sets pictured as trees cannot have infinite length

Von Neumann hierarchy, recursively take subsets of sets, taking unions at end of ordinals to define ordinals

Comprehension axiom: can always find a set of also some property, fails due to Russell’s paradox

Pairing: inductively find sets of pairs of elements

Choice: pick some element from sets of elements to find a new set

Projective dimension of module: minimal length of projective resolution of module over a ring. Osofosky, projective dimension of modules over ring C[x,y,z] is undecidable in ZFC. 2 if continuum hypothesis holds, 3 if it fails.

Power set cardinality, if card(X) < card(Y), note that card subsets of X < card subsets of Y is undecidable in ZFC.

Whitehead problem: 0 to Z to B to A to 0 is spit short exact sequence. Equivalently Ext1(A, Z) = 0, A and B abelian groups. Does this mean A is a free group? Answer by Shelah is undecieable in Zermelo Fraenkel axioms in set theory.

Split exact sequence: short exact sequence built in the simplest possible way (quotients)

Lex: left exact

Solvability: permutations of roots preserving algebraic relations can be used to determine solvability by radicals.

Etale topology: gives a uniform definition of Galois groups and fundamental groups.

Galois group: covering space with fundamental group or universal covering space with algebraic closure.

Module: additive abelian groups closed under left and right linear decomposition f(ax + by) = af(x) + bf(y) of ring multiples of group elements.

Snake lemma: three tensor products _ M exact sequences columns with (module) M except for missing zeroes on 0 to Zm to Zn to A to 0 substituting A, B, C for A. This gives exact sequences of complexes and tensor products except at end of sequence of Tors and start of tensor products of A, B, C. To fill in snake belly, zigzag from Tor(C, M) to A _ M. Well defined forwards due to first column having final image zero. Well defined backwards due to rest of columns having final image zero.

Symmetry of Tor(A,B), not obvious because resolutions are taken first. Construct three sequence by on 0 to Zm to Zn to A to 0 by tensoring (already) Zs, Zt, B where 0 to Zs to Zt to B to 0 is exact. Gives well defined zigzag at last steps since final images vanish, warning not well defined at intermediates. So Tor(A,B) to Tor(B,A) is homomorphism. By symmetry, isomorphism.

Uniqueness of Tor under different resolutions: start with different resolutions, note that A to A is isomorphic. We are stuck with Z^(m1) to Z(m2) and Z^(n1) to Z^(n2) as maps called f - g. No problem, defined boundary maps by abuse of notation to be d, and lifts from Z^(n2) to Z^(m1) to be s. Consider f-g ‎ =  sd by bottom right triangle, and f-g ‎ = ds by top right triangle. Gives argument that f-g ‎ = ds + sd, the commutator sum. Therefore f and g are homotopic. Upon taking tensor products of B to give Tor(A, B) or Tor’(A,B) via the typical sequence 0 to Tor(A, B) to B^(m1) to B^(n1) to zero, due to homotopy of f-g, there is homomorphism of Tor(A, B) and Tor’(A,B). Symmetric argument makes this CANONICAL isomorphism.

Tor distributes over the left and right: proof is easy over bad isomorphism to tensor product of abelian groups for a module.

Construction of Tor, take step 1 free resolution 0 -> Z^M -> Z^N -> A -> 0. You can have M and N drawn at the top in your head, then step 2 you take tensor products with coefficients in B. You will get the exact sequence once you compute homology of this which gives 0 -> Tor(A, B) -> B^M -> B^B -> A -> 0.

Free resolution: take free modules as coefficient of chain complexes… C2 -> C1 -> C0 -> 0 as basis of i-th simplex. You can weaken this to projective resolutions for duality between projective and injectives. Take homotopy of complexes when defining Tor.

Universal coefficient theorem: compute arbitrary homologies over manifold/space M with arbitrary coefficients groups/functors, G instead of using integers. Typical example sheaf of global sections as a group functor. Let _ be tensor, then you can show that it is 0 -> Hi(M, Z) _ G -> Hi(M, G) -> Tor(Hi(M, Z), G) -> 0, which is not Hi(M, Z) \* G as one naively thinks.

Standard counterexample for Hom sets over the module integers modulo two, take sequence from 0 to Z to Z to Z/2 to zero is exact. Take Hom functor integers on Z/2 so it must be 0 to Hom(Z, Z/2) to Hom(Z, Z/2) to Hom(Z/2, Z/2) which is not right exact since kernel Hom(Z, Z/2) vanish but not Hom(Z/2, Z/2) which is Z/2 as standard double cover. Therefore, Ext must be a left exact functor, corresponding to the double cover obstruction. See Borcherds video for homological algebra. Further, the same counterexample can be used to show Tor is only right exact, 0 to Z to 2Z to Z/2 to 0 is exact. Take tensor products in Z/2 coefficients, you get Z/2 to Z/2 to Z/2 to 0 is exact, so this is right exact. This exemplifies the tensor hom adjunction, and also the tor-ext adjunction. Tensor is left adjoint to the right adjoint which is hom. This is one example of the Eckham-Hilton duality.

Constructing Tor: (1) take free or projective resolution of a sequence of abelian groups, (2) take functor/tensor product, (3) take homology. Gives Tor group with “coefficient” of some functor F. Similar construction for Ext but with injective resolutions.

Probability laws are natural transformations from random variable functor to measurable functor.

Random variables are Set endofunctors A^{omega}.

Locally ringed space is topological space by some stalk. Ringed space such that all presheafs are local rings i.e. colimits of global section functors of opens. By Gelfand duality, this corresponds to maximal ideals.

Subringed space is locally isomorphic to opens (on some site) cut out by (\*\*) functions on the opens.

Embedding: very loose way to say adjoint to forgetful functor with extra stuff

Symmetric monoidal category: a braided monoidal category where braidings of tensor product in the same product gives the identity on the tensor product. Or, monoidal tensor products have commutativity up to natural isomorphism.

Braided monoidal category: a monoidal category with a natural isomorphism of tensor products with their indices swapped that gives commutativity using some hexagonal diagram (due to using two categories). This natural isomorphism is called the braiding.

Monoidal category: vertically categorified category where the tensor product is a functor from the product of categories to the category itself with nice properties, (need to define 5, associator, left unitor, right unitor, triangle identity, pentagonal identity because you are working with two category.

Proof that right adjoints preserve limits, the one I understood is the proof here https://ncatlab.org/nlab/show/adjoints+preserve+%28co-%29limits: start with the fact that hom adjunction is naturally isomorphic. This is obvious, by definition of adjunction HomC(L(d), c) is naturally isomorphic to HomD(d, R(c)). You will want to pick c to be the limit, since R is the right adjoint. The second thing is that Hom functors preserve limits. Lastly apply Yoneda’s lemma, natural isomorphism of Hom sets of objects give isomorphism of objects. Apply the first to second to somehow take out the limit. Apply Yoneda’s, the limits are preserved and are naturally isomorphic under action of right adjoints. Formally dual for colimits.

Hom functors, takes product of morphisms in opposite category and category (order is important) to category of set, specifically pairs of morphisms to hom-sets. This preserves limits, taking pairs of (colimit in opposite category, limit in covariant category) to limits in set. Contravariance in first variable C^op \* C means it preserves colimits in the first variable, but C^op reverses this so it also preserves limits. In a sense, the definition of Hom functors ensures that it preserves limits.

Sheaf cohomology can be thought of as obstructions when you have an abelian group on a space and try to patch things locally on abelian groups.

Sheaf cohomology (Wikipedia gives best definition): right derived functors of left exact functor (here, the functor becomes the “coefficients”of the cohomology) of the sheaves of abelian groups on a space to abelian groups. Implies vanishing on negative sheaf cohomology, and also the zeroth cohomology group is given by the group of global sections of the left exact functor on the space.

Enough injectives: for every sheaf there is an injective sheaf with injection from sheaf to injective sheaf. This is proved knowing that category of abelian sheaves form an abelian category. Abelian category Mitchell embeds into category of modules over ring. Nice Kunneth, snakes.

General working example for pullbacks and pushforwards in motivating clients homology, consider a continuous map of topological spaces from Y to X, there is a pullback of sheaves over abelian groups f^\_ from Ab(X) to Ab(Y) which requires sheafification first over colimits, however it is better described by the equality between stalks of the pullback composed with its presheaf functor to the stalk on the image of the element. Pushforward of sheaves is easier in this case from f\_\_ from Ab(Y) to Ab(X), where the composition of the pushforward with the (pre)sheaves functor on a topological space X gives the the global sections functor on the preimage of the topological space. The pullback is exact, the pushforward is only left exact. The composition of the right derived functor on the pubsforward on some space X gives the sheafification of opens to its cohomology on the inverse images with coefficients in the (pre)sheaf functor. Note that inverse images of a sheaf is typically only a presheaf, need to sheafify again.

Motivation for cohomology, the following are equivalent exact sequence of presheaf/sheaf functors is exact if it is exact in stalks, however the global sections functors only give a left exact sequence. The easiest example considering these presheaf functors with integers as the kernel, sheaves over the reals as the image to the sheaves and sheaves over the cokernel is the unit circle. There is an exact sequence of stalks, given by the double cover as the real image of the integers over the circle as a quotient space, but there is no canonical lift of the identity residing the circle to its double cover. This gives a counterexample to how global section functors (which are continuous maps between the circle to the reals or the double cover or continuous maps between the circle to the circle) are exact.

Cohomology from the abelian sheaf functor to the global sections of abelian sheaves functor can be defined as a right derived functor of the zeroth cohomology of underlying sheaf functor to the global sections functor of sets. This has so called enough injectives for snake lemma.

Topological group. Group with left actions and inverses which are continuous (function which gives opens in domain induced by preimage of the function).

Categorical inverse limit on pairs of objects in a category with projections onto a grading of graded objects and transition morphisms between graded objects that commutes when composed. Specifically the composition of the transition morphism with pre-projection gives post-projection with universal property that gives unique morphisms that exists to this inverse limit. This is also known as a direct limit in category theory.
Typical example is the infinite sequence of preimages with closeness at the end (or decidable if you use Stone duality).

Anima: generalisation of homotopy types

Presheaf is a functor from the opposite of category of opens to sets. Note that the opposite of a category of opens hard to define. Closest thing is spatial frame which is Stone dual to sober topological spaces.

Presheaf with functor F# such that for union of open covers, there is a canonical isomorphism of opens that gives the equaliser of morphisms between product of sections to the product of section (set-theoretic) intersections (overlap). This equaliser is glueing or descent.

Sheafification: left adjoint to the fully faithful inclusion of the category of sheaves into presheaves. You can use an adjoint functor theorem. Follows from the key step of the preservation of all limits from the definition of Zariski descent.

Separated presheaf: sections F(U) include into product of section of covering opens U_i for any cover.

Stalks are colimits of sections of opens for elements in opens. (Local). Stalks are direct limits of over open subset containing a point.

Sections are the sheaf functors applied on opens.

Left adjoint and right adjoint being the same functor is not an equivalence, consider endofunctor of A-modules taking the module to the zero ideals Hom(0,M) is naturally isomorphic to H(M,0) but these are not equivalence of categories.

Forgetful functors always have left adjoint which is “free” to get back all your structure. The left adjoints have various examples, free groups and polynomial rings are OK, completion of metric spaces and universal enveloping algebras are not OK examples.

Kan extensions are simply induced functors from F\* : Set^B to Set^A given functor F from A to B. Ends describe Kan extensions explicitly.

Special adjoint functor theorem: example: consider inclusion as functor from compact Hausdorff spaces to topological space, it has small homsets for both, Tychonoff theorem gives preservation of finite products, equalisers exist so finite limits are preserved. Subobjects exist, since injective continuous (injective monics) exist and are small, so compact Hausdorff spaces are well powered. Cogenerating set is small, and is unit interval. Therefore by the special adjoint functor theorem, Stone Cech compactification exists as left adjoint to this functor of inclusions

Inverse limit: https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/38517/in-relatively-simple-words-what-is-an-inverse-limit

Ergodic theory, semi group actions with no (additively structured) inverses, use this as the basis of modelling dynamics and absorbing states in ergodic theory. See Erdos notes.

Sign of permutation is inevitable, proof is consider a n sphere, boundary is (n-1) sphere which can be constructed in simplicies/CW complex, but spheres can be realised as sphere spectrum, which correspond to the integers as group under addition forgetting the spectra properly, integers as a abelian group has two automorphisms, trivial and negations therefore there is a well defined homomorphism from symmetric group of n to symmetric group order 2. Related to Tor.

Example, take model of group object. We have group, topological group, Lie group, semi direct product. Category of points of topoi is isomorphic to models of theory.

Ultraproduct, Cartesian product modulo ultra filter, filter is family of subset of power set 2^I, I is some indexing or grading, closed under superset and non empty intersections, the following are equivalent filter is ultrafilter, no filter greater than that filter, proper subsets are closed by inclusion or the complement inclusion. Ultraproducts are defining things in first order logic,

Makkai conceptual completeness, for a functor of (coherent) pretopoi, if the induced contravariant functor on models of pretopoi is an equivalence of categories, then the former functor is an equivalence of categories

Boolean ring: it is a ring of idempotent, 0 and 1 are idempotent so it is canonically isomorphic to ring of integers modulo 2. Now, consider 1 + 1 = 0 using the fact that it is a ring and must have additive inverse 1. If you drop additive inverse and have 1 as an absorbing element 1 + 1 = 1, you get (default) disjunction, and it is a Boolean semiring

A Boolean algebra is a ring where every element is idempotent.

Frame: Stone dual to topological space that is a partially ordered set lattice with some defining distribution of conjunction and the existence of either supremum or infinum for every set

Stone spaces: compact Hausdorff spaces which are totally disconnected. Cantor topology is the prototypical example of a Stone space.

Isbell adjunction and Isbell duality, space is geometry, quantity is algebra, take the smooth space and consider its colimit, the left adjunction taking smooth spaces to smooth rings, as copresheafification, consider a smooth algebra, taking its spectrum or sheafification gives its limit which is a smooth space as right adjoint.

Six functor formalism, three adjunctions. You want two adjunctions first, direct image to inverse image for morphisms as adjoints, direct image with compact support with exceptional inverse image or Verdier duality adjoints for separated morphisms, lastly it’s the symmetric monoidal tensor product with internal hom as adjoint. See Scholzes notes.

Separated morphism, diagonal morphism is a morphism mapping a space X to its diagonal X with product in Y is such is a closed subspace of the diagonal X to Y.

Diagonal: canonical isomorphism to the self Cartesian product

Internal hom is basically internally defined morphism as object or a generalisation of non set as that identity, however they just define it as right adjoint to symmetric monoidal tensor product Analogous Ext and Tor. Symmetric monoidal Tor means internal Ext. Ext measures defect in how set exactness, Tor measures defect in tensor product exactness.

Direct image with compact support, consider morphism of schemes, consider sections such that restrictions of support to opens are nice.

Pontrjagin dual: easy example is additive on integers to circle group, take products of roots of unity gives Fourier theory. Circle group is compact and connected, integers must be discrete and torsion free by Pontrjagin duality. The exponential maps gives self duality of the additive reals (sums of powers of exponential)

Eckhmann-Hinton duality
The most basic duality by reversing arrows in category theory.
Fuks duality: take endofunctors of compact pointed (important for suspensions) Hausdorff spaces. Duality is expressed between loop space and suspension space. Endofunctor of loop space gives suspension space. Endofunctor of suspension space gives loop space.
This works heuristically for: homotopy dual to cohomology, mapping cylinder to mapping cocylinder, fibration to cofibration.

Tannaka duality: monoid with its module category are dual, considering automorphisms/endomorphisms of some forgetful functor called the fibre functor that gives the monoid structure. Just apply Yoneda’s lemma using the fact that the fibre functor is endomorphism.

Proof sketch for G-set with Tannaka duality (like Cayley’s theorem), C as Set^G or GSet
Aut(F) = Set^(SetG)(F,F) = Set^(SetG)(SetG(G, -), SetG(G, -)) = SetG(G, G) = G
Abusing notation for GSet and isomorphism due to Yoneda’s lemma.

Makkai duality: syntax of first order logic (pretopoi) corresponds to the semantics of first order logic (ultracategories). Further, opposite category of small pretopoi maps to ultracategories, ultrafunctors of from ultra category to set has the structure of a small pretopos

Koszul duality, generalising the fact that d^2 = 0 encodes a commutative law and d^2w (differential) = 0, recall that this is case for some long sequences, one can get that having free graded comm algebra on the special linear group into a differential graded algebra is the same as making it into a Lie algebra (Jacobi identity is indeed = 0), duality having free graded Lie algebra on special linear group into a differential graded algebra makes it into a commutative algebra (d^2 = 0 encodes a commutative law)

Ergodicity: all states are accessible from one another. One can lose ergodicity with irreversible decisions. Take some measurable space, impose either actions on monoid of measurable space with measurable functions (random variables) or Markov kernels (don’t understand this), then a invariant measure is ergodic if the measure obeys some zero one law (measure which are only zero and one)

Stabiliser of a group element a is a set such that left action of group element in group G is absorbed into a by a $ga = a$

Künneth formula, takes products of cohomology to tensor products of cohomology correcting by Tor groups. Like distribution law for Ext and Tor.

Universal coefficient theorem, generalisation of Künneth formula in stable homotopy theory where cohomology or Ext is replaced by suitable spectra, and tensor product or Tor is replaced by smash product

Compatification, include the point at infinity means consider that (or assume that) something is decidable in infinite time is under consideration

Neighbourhood means it is possible to do logical inference in finite time.

Refinement of open cover means better experiment than the open cover itself in terms of efficiency of information obtained.

Open cover refers to decidable experiment in finite time, compact means admits open covers referring to decidable by one experiment.

Example of verification in finite time corresponding to semidecidable logic, verify something is open in finite time, closed set not so because of points in the boundary requiring infinitely many computations.

Stone duality, poset lattice correspond to topology, with poset lattice interpreted as a form of logic, this corresponds to topology being defined as a semidecidable logic, where arbitrary unions correspond decidable disjunctions, finite intersections correspond to decidable conjunctions in finite time.

Etale cohomology, you want a topological or etale topology with arbitrary direct limits and finitely inverse limits, reminiscent of the definition of a topology with arbitrary unions and finite intersections. This topological notion gives the right correspondence for topoi.

Morphism of topos should have the same intuition as continuous functions, preimages

Giraud axioms: defines a topos, need flatness unramified so that you don’t have a double cover where one half winds to infinity to map nicely onto the circle.

Etale space, geometrically corresponds to some double cover. The circle is some terminal object that all other objects (looking like etale space) maps into the terminal object, analogous to how double cover maps onto circle.

Prefix free definition of Kolmogorov complexity, constraints on what counts as a definition only. Practical outcomes, products become direct sums of complexity up to additive constant O(1). More importantly, probability of 2^-K converges for prefix free Kolmogorov complexity of K.

Grothendieck’s typical question: two examples. (1) if we have a functor from schemes/rings to set, what scheme or ring does it represent? Similarly if we have a spectra, what cohomology theory does it represent by Brown’s representability theorem in connected CW complex with base point?

Complete varieties, define them in such a way such that it is easy to generalise. Define proper maps of scheme, pick base scheme a field, then if proper map of schemes exist preimage is complete variety, easy to generalise if you can easily replace the base scheme.

Example of base scheme to define families of schemes, reverse currying, take elliptic curve y^2 - x^3 - ax - b. Instead of working over C2, work over C4, then have a, b fixed point. The inverse image of the fixed point is a family of schemes.

Morphisms of schemes are primary object in Grothendieck’s philosophy, the idea is you want to define maps to a base scheme, and every scheme maps to the terminal object the spectrum of the integers. This way when you have some definition of a property of the morphism, you can replace the base scheme to get something else

Z[t]/t^2 thickening of affine line with nilpotent everywhere, K1 contains invertible elements, can tell it is NOT A1 homotopy invariant by picking certain invertible elements that is in one but not the other

Brown representability: all cohomology theories can be represented by spectra, need pointed connected spaces, CW complexes to state LES.

Wedge sum, glue together pointed spaces at the point.

Cayley’s Theorem, one of my favourites because once you understand Cayley’s Theorem, you understand Yoneda embedding and Yoneda’s lemma. Note: not trivial, requires key step.
Consider underlying element of group x, mapping to left action gx. IMPORTANT: groups are closed, so this is bijection, since this is a bijection on the same set, it is a permutation, so groups must be isomorphic to permutation groups (or subgroups of symmetric groups) under composition of permutations.
Yoneda’s: considering homset(b, a) mapping to natural transformations nat(hom(a, -), hom(b, -)). This must be an isomorphism, since compositions of morphisms are morphisms. Therefore, define this as an Yoneda embedding (if on sets), and all small categories are embed into the category of functors of defined on that categories, which are represented by pre-sheaves or representable functors.

Groups as symmetries of something given by Cayley theorem, closure of left action is key step.

Subgroup of unital associative magmas with inverses preserved. Same unit, same magma operation.

Free abelian group, group by composition of basis elements

Chain complex has free abelian group (have generators as basis) on n simplex with sign alternating boundary maps preserving orientation (clockwise or counterclockwise). Related to Tor.

Nerves, take functor from n simplex to category. Nerve of 0 is object, nerve of 1 is morphism, nerve of 2 is pairs of morphisms. Fully faithful embedding, take forgetful of partial order structure of nerves to get back category

Smooth morphism of scheme, approximated by affine space at any point, no nilpotent, but regular scheme. You want finiteness condition (presentation whatever that means) and flatness. Since this is a morphism of schemes, it is relative and defines a smooth scheme. That is the beauty of Grothendieck’s morphism oriented way of thinking.
IMPORTANT POINT. YOU WANT THE FIBRES TO BE REGULAR. Example maps between regular schemes can fail to be smooth. Example V(xy) from affine plane to affine line. But the affine plane and affine line are regular schemes!

Regular, think differential geometrically, consider dimension of Zariski tangent space is equal to the Krull dimension (computed using chains of noetherian stuff, max length) of local ring (local rings/ maximal ideals / points)

Fully faithful, get from cohomology to abelian group by taking cohomology of a point

Subobject classifier: basic idea is instead of subset object of a set X, pick a set X then pick a map called a characteristic map chi, the subset is now a characteristic map chi, this is Grothendieck philosophy, use a machine/morphism instead of the thing itself.

A ring is a monoid with tensor product of abelian groups.

Galois extension, normal means linear affines, separable means no nilpotents.

Galois extension is a normal separable extension. Normal means decomposed to linear factor, separable means no repeated roots or factors. Automorphism fixing some point. Automorphism of field extension (recall you have some subfield, of a field extension) is an endomorphism (recall idempotence) that is an isomorphism (preserve structure), Galois group is exists for these, on the automorphisms of a field extension. Analogous to linear algebra, Jordan blocks with nontrivial multiplicity.

Subfield and subgroups are bijective, that is the fundamental theorem of Galois theory.

Prime spectrum: colimit of some sort of chain of suspensions. Reminds me of stalks, which are colimits of neighbourhoods of functions.

Separatedness, cannot be represented by two disjoint open subsets. Generalise to sites!

Higher inductive types are machine readable homotopy theory.
Call yourself again when you define some homotopic object. Example is circle with a base with a type called circle (recursively) and a loop with a type base == base. For 2 spheres, same exercise, use base2 as twosphere, but use idpath of base2 instead of ==. Example, univalence axiom can have this loops as the integers. Interval also work the same logic, interval is defined inductively where zero and one has type interval, then segment is of type zero == one. Suspension, define north and south inductively as susp X, then define meridian as the X -> north == south.

However, you can derive finite fields of non prime integers, for example F4 using irreducible quadratic x^2 + x + 1 as quotient of F2

Rings of integers modulo integer must have prime characteristic, prime powers do not have invertibles, classic example is 2 \* 2 is not invertible in Z/4.

Fermats little theorem by induction using binomial theorem with some lemma that makes the relevant terms vanish

K-theory: (1) vector bundles, pick nice things like infinity-ring or spectra (2) sheafify with site, Zariski or Nisnevich are common options

The type of functions is denoted by a witness a to a morphism of propositions A -> B so we have a : a -> B.

A type witness pair, a is a witness of proposition A (proposition as types) we denote this by a : A.

Bool as a two type can be thought of as a type of propositions.

Equality is analogous to the homotopy path lifting property.

Function type is analogous to Cartesian product since both can used as primitives to construct a type theory.

Spectrum: representation of cohomology by Brown representability theorem

Fields:

- every element is invertible
- Every module (vector space) over fields are free or have basis (need Zorn’s)

Smash product generalised tensor product which is a product that is bilinear since a ring is a monoid with tensor product of abelian groups. Tensor product corresponds to Tor.

Field extension, easy define some subfield with some subset, then the main field is the field extension. Also, the subset is adjunction to the field extension. From field to field extension, if it is a ring homomorphism preserving ring structure, must be an injection.

Skew field, non-commutative field

Eilenberg-Steenrod axioms for cohomology: contravariance,
homotopy invariant, excision, suspension isomorphisms, disjoints to products, dimension axiom.

Contravariance, maps X to Y induces maps the other way round

Excision, cohomology of Y vanishes on X, then it must come from reduced cohomology of X mod Y as quotient group

Homotopy invariant, preserves homotopy which is some interval map that is a continuous idempotent endomorphism.

Suspension isomorphism, cohomology of space is isomorphic to suspension of a space up to shift by one.

Disjoint unions of spaces form products of abelian groups under cohomology

Dimension axiom, get back abelian group taking zeroth cohomology of a point, vanishing otherwise.

Total singular complex in May’s book is the same as a CW complex, proof of S(X) has extension property.

Square of stable infinity categories Cartesian. You have D(R) D(R[1/f]) D(R[1/g]) D(R[1/fg]) being commuting as Cartesian. D is derived category of a ring. Note that the quotient looks like Zariski descent already.

Motivic homotopy theory, use affine line instead of unit interval in definition of homotopy.

Retracts are continuous idempotent (or misleadingly, projections) endomorphisms. Projections are similar.

Deformation retracts are continuous homotopic idempotent endomorphisms. Difference is notion of time.

Cobordism: you draw two spaces, draw some cylinder in between two of them, that is a cobordism somehow. Natural space like thing that looks like a morphism

Group completion of finite sets gives sphere spectrum. Barrett-Priddy-Quillen theorem.

Bott periodicity, take complex k theory of point of higher degrees. Of even degrees it is integers, vanishes for odd degrees. Not sure how you get the right way round?

Symmetric spectra, some centrality, defined by some suspension, unit isomorphism, stable homotopy groups, multiplication maps. Take some chain of smash products must be equivariant (domain and codomain acted on by the same group) both acted on by symmetric group. A monoid of this is a symmetric ring spectrum. With pointed simplicial sets.

Types, you have witness k of a type K. Denoted by k : K. K is proposition, in some universe with type ambiguity Ui : Ui+1 vanishing to avoid paradoxes. Propositions, are analogous, set objects which are analogous to points.

Family of types is known as a context.

Types of maps corresponds to proofs corresponds to functions on sets corresponding to function spaces.

Simplicial set is a presheaf on the simplicial category with finite non empty totally ordered sets as objects and non decreasing monotonic maps satisfying the cosimplicial identities.

Kan condition, compatible by deletion of adjacent, and a simplex delete a vertex and get back any vertex. NOTE: in May this is called Kan extension, but modern literature saves Kan extension for categorical notion.

Compact, every limit point is point. Or with Stone duality, any decidable proposition is computable within finite time.

Suspension. Draw two points at the top. Make suspension. Somehow there is some sigma and somehow you can spam it till infinity.

Spectra, some cohomology theory, fully faithful from abelian group
Generalise abelian group. Examples.
Spectra means I can use geometry

Propositions as types, you want types to be points.

Higher inductive type. Motivation! Apply homotopy theory methods in logic. Most exciting part, thing I care about.

Motives. Realisation from some nice category to explain other cohomology theories.

Ring is an abelian group with a monoidal structure that interacts with the abelian group via the tensor product.

Tensor product and smash product in spectra.

Magma means set with binary operation.
Unital associative magma, monoid.
Unital associative invertible magma, group.

Exercise: draw $\mathrm{Spec(\mathbb{C}[x,y])}$. Three types of prime ideals.
Maximal points. Non-closed 1D points that look like curves that contain
maximal closed points so it is irreducible, and a generic point, if you localise
you invert everything that is not in $\mathbb{C}[x,y]$.

Exercise: draw $\mathrm{Spec(\mathbb{R}[x])}$. Line affine line,
with ramification points of complex conjugate pairs.

Mapping from $\mathbb{Z} \rightarrow \mathbb{Z}[i]$ gives
mapping from $\mathrm{Spec} (\mathbb{Z}) \leftarrow \mathrm{Spec}(\mathbb{Z}[i])$.
This gives three types. Ramification points, no primes, splits into two.

Principal ideal domain corresponds to the spectrum looking like an affine line. How is this related to Z as PID from classification of surfaces?

Picard groups corresponds to a group of line bundles.
This assigning a vector space 1D to each point.
Group completion of Dedekind domain gives ring of integer and Picard group

Group completion of circle S1, give trivial Z and Mobius band Z/2 since two mobius bands give circle

Group completion needs Zariski sheafification ahead of time to work on some projective modules thing.

Ideal class groups corresponds to Picard group schemes of the ring of integers.

Discrete valuation ring corresponds to Sierpinski two point space.

Chinese Remainder Theorem, giving a function on a disconnected
space is the same as a giving a function on its connected components
for disjoint union of subvarieties. This corresponds to the product
of the spectrum of two schemes which gives the disjoint union of schemes.

Exercise: draw $\mathrm{Spec(\mathbb{C}[x,y])}/(x,y)$. Gives picture of local ring at one point.

Spectrum of zero ring is empty since zero is not a prime ideal and zero is not an integral domain. Hartshorne define it this way.

Kernel of surjective map from rings to fields correspond to maximal ideals.

Localisation of quotients and taking of quotients of localisations are equivalent, and they both give a residue field. What is the geometric interpretation of this?

Stalks of sheaves represent localisation of $A$-module at prime $p$ or local rings.

Skyscraper sheaf is like the Dirac delta distribution.

Mapping from $\mathbb{Z} \rightarrow \mathbb{Z}[x]$ gives
mapping from $\mathrm{Spec} (\mathbb{Z}) \leftarrow \mathrm{Spec}(\mathbb{Z}[x])$.
Fibers are finite field. Horizontal lines are quadratic residues. Fiber at zero is the ring of quotients, invert anything nonzero.

Fibres of $\mathcal{O}$-module of locally ringed space at point $p$
correspond to $\dfrac{\mathcal{F}_p}{m_p \mathcal{F}_p}$.

Glueing is flat descent.
Categorically: $0 \rightarrow \mathcal{F}(U) \rightarrow \prod \mathcal{F}(U_{i}) \rightarrow \prod \mathcal{F}(U_{ij})$ is exact.
There exists an exact sequence of products of overlapping open covers in topological space.
Motivates the definition of site: where we generalise with fibre products, and open covers are generalised to sites.

Tangent space: assign polynomial its linear term in Taylor's series
at point $a$, take all equations describing variety $X$, linearise them at $a$, take the common zero locus. Approximates local dimension.
Oh this is magical reading it again.

A regular local ring is an integral domain: a variety that is regular at a point should not consist of several components that meet in this point. This corresponds to the points being able to be approximated by affine varieties at that point, see also definition of smoothness, but they approximate it by Euclidean space with Euclidean topology instead.

Valuation of an element: order of vanishing of a local function on a curve at a point. Note: works on any integral domains and quotient fields, so can be in any abelian group
and not just integers. Example: for a $k$ to be a field of rational functions of variety $X$ around smooth point $a$, the valuation can be thought of as an order of a zero or pole at smooth point $a$ in the variety.

Fields are zero dimensional regular local rings i.e smooth schemes modelled by affines with Krull dimension zero.

Discrete valuation rings are one dimensional regular local rings.

Singular curve: some sort of self crossing in the curve. Nonsingular means no crossing.

1-dim regular local rings: local properties of smooth points on curves.

Dedekind domains: key examples are irreducible smooth curves in algebraically closed fields.

Picard group of Dedekind domain corresponds to how far the Dedekind domain is from unique factorisation domain.
See also K-theory of Dedekind domain giving the direct sum of the integers with its Picard group.

Prime factorisation:
Decomposition of varieties into pieces that cannot be subdivided further.
Prime factorisation also encodes orders of vanishing of function $f$ of all points of a
irreducible smooth curve $X$. Example: $X = V(y^2 - x(x-1)(x - \lambda))$ in Gathmann's notes.
Exercise: draw this
Pick general linear function $l$, general line crosses at three points which are maximal ideals
so $(l) = P_1 \cdot P_2 \cdot P_3$, special linear functions $l'$
COINCIDES so $(l') = P_1' P_2'$.

However, recall that the underlying valuations on the local rings are defined originally
not only on these discrete valuation rings, but also on their quotient field.
Geometrically, this means that we can equally well consider orders of rational
functions, i. e. quotients of polynomials, at a smooth point of a curve.
These orders can then be positive (if the function has a zero),
negative (if it has a pole), or zero (if the function has a non-zero value at the given point).

Affine varieties are "shapes". Varieties are rings of polynomial functions.
They are also closed sets in Zariski topology.

Disconnected: disjoint union of closed sets in Zariski topology is empty.

Dimension of variety: supremum of chain inclusions of irreducible closed subsets / subvarieties $X$.

Condensed formalism, care about compact (all limit points are points),
Hausdorff (disjoint opens exist), totally disconnected )

Codimension of $Y$ in $X$, supremum of chain inclusions of irreducible closed subsets / subvarieties
from $Y$ to $X$. Local dimension at this point. Local dimension of irreducible variety is the same at every point.

Pure dimension: valid only for Noetherian topological spaces, every irreducible component has same dimension which is $n$. Affine varieties with pure dimension 1 are curves, pure dimension 2 are surfaces, more than that hypersurfaces. Examples where definition of pure dimensions breaks down includes a line (variety) passing through a plane (variety)

Subvariety $Y$ on fixed variety $X$: ideal of all functions on $X$ that vanish on $Y$. Specifically, radical ideals. Ideals of subvarieties are always radical and exact on algebraically closed fields.

Morphism of varieties: ring homomorphism with source and target reversed. Made automatic with presheaves as contravariant functors from category typically of rings to category of (open) sets. Sections of presheaf are elements of ring of functions on open sets.

Sheafs allowing gluing of presheaves and conditions on it are local.

Germs of (pre)sheaf at point $a$, functions defined on small neighbourhood, these are local functions.
Examples: rational functions with nonvanishing denominator at point $a$.

Stalks of a (pre)sheaf at a point, like localisations of presheaf at some point.

Passing from ideals to varieties reverses inclusions. Smaller zero ideal generates whole space. Vanishes on whole space.

Localisation makes more elements invertible by allowing fractions, geometrically it is zooming in on a variety at a local point.

Spectrum of integers. Points of all prime ideals, with a fat point with the zero ideal.

Full space: zero ideal.

Empty set: $(1)$ as ideal or the unit ideal. Useful in showing (quasi)compactness of Zariski topology?

Intersection of subvarieties: sum of ideals.

Union of subvarieties: product or intersection of ideals.

Difference of subvarieties: quotient of ideals.
Strictly, the difference $Y \backslash Z$ is in general not a variety, so the exact geometric operation corresponding to quotient ideals is taking the smallest subvariety containing $Y \backslash Z$.

Disjoint subvarieties: coprime ideals.

Fibered products correspond to tensor products. Exercise: draw fibered products.

Vector bundles are equivalent to class groups.
Exercise: make sense of this. Also, prove integers as principal ideal domain from
homology of torus and classification of surfaces.

Lattice of integers correspond to the adjoining a root onto the integers.

Homology or cohomology show how far it fails under localisation.
Exactness give some Euler characteristic +2, F - E + V - 2 = 0.
Mike Hopkins add holes become zero, easy way to remember is to divide the a torus in the regions. 4 barriers, 4 regions, no vertices, so zero.

Zero germ corresponds to localisation of maximal ideal at point $p$ being zero. See also stalks.

Images of varieties: contraction of ideals.

Inverse images of subvarieties: extension of ideals.

Prime ideals: irreducibles or points.

Maximal ideals: closed points.

Not every ring is the coordinate ring of a variety,
so for general rings we have to find an algebraic argument (Zorn's lemma) that ensures the existence of maximal ideals.

For every ideal in a ring, a radical of an ideal consists of
the intersections of prime ideals is shown by Zorn's lemma.
This corresponds to the geometrically obvious statement that the
variety is the union of its irreducible subvarieties.

Fractions: rational functions that are local functions
well defined at a point.

Localisation: restricting function to arbitrarily small
neighbourhoods $q$. Like defining differentiability and continuity.

Localisation as $u(as' - a's) = 0$ for some $u \in S$, $S$ multiplicatively closed. Gathmann gives an immediate way to remember geometrically:
Pick point $a = (1, 0)$, $(y/1)$ and $(0/1)$ must agree for
variety $X = V(xy)$ but fails since $(y \cdot 1 - 0 \cdot 1) \neq 0$.
This is fixed by introducting $x$ so
$x(y \cdot 1 - 0 \cdot 1) = xy = 0$.

Noetherian: finite descending inclusion chain of varieties towards empty.
Make subvariety smaller by dropping irreducible component or reduce
dimension of subvariety. Decomposition of a subvariety into finitely many
irreducible subvarieties is always possible for Noetherians.

$V(x,y)$ is $y = x$ is a point.

$V(xy)$ is $xy$ axes.

Embedded components: subvariety contained in another subvariety.
Example is $(0)$ as fat point contained in line for
the spectrum of integers, isolated points.
The corresponding algebraic statement is that $P_2$
contains another prime ideal $P_1$ occurring as a radical in the decomposition; we will also say that $P_2$ is an embedded and $P_1$ an isolated prime ideal.

Artinian: finitely ascending chains of varieties. So Artinian coordinate rings are finite unions of points. Not true for Noetherian.
Algebraically, this means zero ideal is always product of maximal ideals.

Prime and irreducible elements. Consider
coordinate ring $R = \mathbb{R}[x,y]/(x^2 + y^2 - 1)$.
Irreducible. Since it is a circle, not a product of two lines. Lines are linear polynomials in $\mathbb{R}[x,y]$.
It is still irreducible in $R$ since lines must cross from
inside to outside. This is not prime in $R$ since it consists of two points.
Exercise, reproduce example 8.7 in Gathmann.

Irreducible: cannot be written as union of closed sets in Zariski topology.

Ring extension map $\mathbb{C}[x,y] \rightarrow \mathbb{C}[x,y]/(f)$
(smaller ideal to larger ideal)
is morphism of varieties $\pi$ from larger variety to smaller variety.
Drawing only the real points, we have examples of
points $V(xy)$ with morphism $\pi$ to the real line ($V(x)$).
Exercise: reproduce Gathmann 9.4 as exercise.
Inverse images of $\pi$ are fibers. Geometrically, this is an infinite fibre
at $x = 0$. Try examples of $y^2 - x^2$ giving two point fibres except at origin,
and $xy - 1$ giving one point fibres except empty fibre at origin.
The precise geometric correspondence is more complicated.

Normal domains: Coordinate ring of irreducible varieties. Quotient field are rational functions well defined except at isolated points where
denominator vanishes. Example: $\mathbb{C}[x]$ is normal, rational function is ill defined as a pole but cannot satisfy monic relation since its highest order pole cannot be cancelled by lower order poles.
$\mathbb{R}[x,y]/(y^2 - x^2 - x^3)$ is not normal, looks likereducible two lines $V(x+y)$ $V(x-y)$
at origin approaching $+1$ and $-1$ at origin.

Noetherian normalisation: example of $V(x_1x_2 - 1)$ fails lying over at origin. Coordinate transform to tilt it to $V(y_2 - y_1^2 - 1)$, $x_1 = y_2 + y_1$, $x_2 = y_2 - y_1$. Lying over is OK. See Gathmann notes.

Finite ring extensions: surjective geometric maps with finite fibers preserving dimension. See example 9.19 in Gathmann.

Sum of radical ideals are not radical. Easy: take tangent of $V(x^2)$ and $V(x)$

Blowing up: replace origin with a projective space to see inside it.

Regular local ring is always an integral domain (no zero divisors): variety is locally irreducible at every smooth point.

Fat points: See $\mathrm{Spec}(K[x]/(x^2))$. There is a fat point
at the origin on an affine line you can only see linearisations,
on a plane it will start to stick out more.

Local rings: rational function with well defined values at point and does not admit similar evaluation maps since the denominator of the fraction might vanish there i.e. unique maximal ideal.

Projective curves: add point at infinity for parallel lines to intersect.
Embed each point $(x_1, ..., x_n)$ to $(1, x_1: ... x_n)$ as
affine coordinates, the reamining points are
$(0, x_1: ... x_n)$ as points at infinity so $\mathbb{P}^n = \mathbb{A}^{n} \cup \mathbb{P}^{n-1}$.
as affine and infinite part. Analysts call these Riemann spheres.

Flatness: Let $f : X \rightarrow S$ be a morphism of schemes, and assume that $S$ is reduced.
(i) If $S$ is a smooth curve then $f$ is called (geometrically) flat if no
component of $X$ is mapped to a single point in $S$.
Here by component we mean an irreducible or embedded component,
i.e. (in the affine picture) the subvarieties of $X$ occurring in the
primary decomposition of the ring that defines $X$.

Weak Nullstellensatz shows that the “traditional points”
are present as points of the scheme, carries over to any algebraically closed field.
If the field is not algebraically closed, traditional points are glued together into clumps by Galois conjugation, as in real affine line and the affine line over $F_p$.

Quasicompact and quasiseparated if and only if X can be covered by a
finite number of affine open subsets, any two of which have intersection also covered by a finite number of affine open subsets.
I notice that affines causes the word quasi.

Consider the case $A = \mathbf{C}[x, y]/(xy)$ and $f = x$.
What is the localization $A_f$?
The space $\mathrm{Spec} C[x, y]/(xy)$
“is” the union of the two axes in the plane.
Localizing means throwing out the locus where $x$ vanishes.
So we are left with the x-axis, minus the origin,
so we expect $\mathrm{Spec} \mathbf{C}[x]_x$ .
Exercise: what natural isomorphism is there?

Suppose we have a function (ring element) vanishing at all points.
Then it is not necessarily the zero function! Why, nilpotent.
The translation of this question is: is the intersection of all prime ideals necessarily just $0$?
The answer is no, as is shown by the example of the ring of dual numbers
$k[\epsilon]/(\epsilon^2): \epsilon  \neq 0$, but
$\epsilon^2 = 0$.
Any function whose power is zero certainly lies in the intersection of all prime ideals.
Functions are not determined by their values at points: the fault of nilpotents.

If a ring has no nonzero nilpotents, we say that it is reduced. Compare to irreducible.

Projective $n$-space is the union of lines through origin in dimension $n+1$.

A geometric point of a scheme $X$ is defined to be a morphism $\mathrm{Spec}(k) \rightarrow X$
where $k$ is an algebraically closed field.

A geometric fiber of a morphism $X \rightarrow Y$ is defined to be the fiber over a geometric point of $Y$, i.e., the fibered product
with the geometric point $Spec k \rightarrow Y$.

A morphism has connected (respectively. irreducible, integral, reduced) geometric fibers if all its geometric fibers are
connected (resp. irreducible, integral, reduced). One usually says that the morphism has geometrically connected (resp. geometrically irreducible,
geometrically integral, geometrically reduced) fibers.

A $k$-scheme $X$ is geometrically connected (resp. geometrically irreducible, geometrically
integral, geometrically reduced) if the structure morphism $X \rightarrow \mathrm{Spec} k$
has geometrically connected (resp. irreducible, integral, reduced) fibers. Recall Grothendieck’s philosophy where you want to define the structure morphism to get these properties over a base spectrum/scheme Spec k.
We will soon see that to check any of these conditions, we need only base change to $k$.

A site is a structure that enables descent not by using intersections of subsets in descent with fibre products. See condensed formalism intro by Scholze.

Zariski cotangent space of a local ring $(A, m)$ is defined to be $m/m^2$; it is a vector space over the residue field $A/m$.

The dual vector space is the Zariski tangent space. If $X$ is a scheme, the Zariski cotangent space $Tv$ at a $X,p$ point $p \in X$ is defined to be the Zariski cotangent space of the local ring $\mathbb(O)(X,p)$ (and similarly for the Zariski tangent space $TX,p$). Elements of the Zariski cotangent space are cotangent vectors or differentials; elements of the tangent space are tangent vectors.

Schemes are topological spaces with a sheaf of unital rings whose colimits over all values of this sheaf on open subsets over every point called stalks that must be local rings or rings with a unique maximal ideal.

Locally ringed space: sheaf + topological space
